Prophet Yusuf (Joseph) 


Introduction to Joseph’s Story 

This is the most detailed and faseinating story in the Quran, involving both human weaknesses 
such as jealousy, hatred, pride, passion, deception, intrigue, cruelty, and terror as well as noble 
qualities such as patience, loyalty, bravery, nobility, and compassion. 

It is related that among the reasons for its revelation is that the Jews asked the Prophet 
Muhammad (pbuh) to tell them about Joseph (pbuh) who was one of their old prophets. His story 
had been distorted in parts and marred in others with interpolation and exclusions. Therefore it 
was revealed in the Book of Allah (Quran), complete in its minute and careful details. 

Allah the Almighty declared; 

"We relate unto you (Muhammad) the best of stories through Our Revelations unto you, of this 
Quran. And before this (i.e. before the coming of Divine Inspiration to you), you were among 
those who knew nothing about it (the Quran). ( Ch 12:3 Quran) 

Almighty Allah also decreed.' 

"Thus We relate to you (O Muhammad) some information of what happened before. And indeed 
We have give you from Us a Reminder (this Quran). Whoever turns away from it (this 
Quran—i.e. does not believe in it, nor acts on its orders), verily they will bear a heavy burden (of 
sins) on the Day of Resurrection. They will abide in that (state in the Fire of Hell), and evil 
indeed will it be that load for them on the Day of Resurrection.(Ch 20:99-101) 

The story of Joseph (pbuh) moves in a stream Ifom beginning to end; its substance and form are 
equally coherent. It inspires you with a feeling for the depth of Allah's power and supremacy and 
the execution of His rulings despite the challenge of human intervention. 

"And Allah has full power and control over His Affairs, but most of men know not. (Ch 12:21) 
This is what the story of Joseph (pbuh), confirms categorically, for it ends with comfort and 
marvels. 

Summary of Joseph's Story 

Joseph lived all his life confronting schemes made by the people closest to him. His brothers 
plotted to kill him, but they amended it to exiling him. This happened to him while he was a boy. 
He was sold into the slave market in Egypt, where he was bought for a nominal sum. Then he fell 
victim to the attempted seduction by a great man's wife who, when her wish was foiled, sent him 
to prison, where he remained for some time. In spite of all of this, he at length approached close 





to the Egyptian throne and became the king's chief minister. He then began his call to Allah from 
the position of the ruling authority. 

Allah's plans were carried out, and the matter ended. This is the substance (theme) of the story. 

As for the form (style) in which it is presented, it is a landmark of wonder. 

The Story's Presentation 

The story is presented in a sequence of episodes. It gives you scene after scene and the transition 
is inspiring, informative, and stirring to the imagination. There are also artistic loopholes, which 
leave it to the imagination of the reader to complete the sense, as well as the depth of the picture, 
the like of which no human artist can bring forth. 

Joseph's Childhood 

The story begins with a dream and ends with its interpretation. As the sun appeared over the 
horizon, bathing the earth in its morning glory, Joseph (pbuh), son of the Prophet Jacob (pbuh) 
awoke from his sleep, delighted by a pleasant dream he had had. Filled with excitement he ran to 
his father and related it. 

"O my father! Verily, I saw (in a dream) eleven stars and the sun and the moon, I saw them 
prostrating themselves to me." (Ch 12:4) 

His father's face lit up. He foresaw that Joseph would be one through whom the prophecy of his 
grandfather. Prophet Abraham (pbuh), would be fulfilled, in that his offspring would keep the 
light of Abraham's house ahve and spread Allah's message to mankind. 

Therefore, it was narrated that Allah's Messenger Muhammad (pbuh) was asked: "Who is the 
most honorable amongst the people?" He replied: "The most God-fearing." The people said: "We 
do not want to ask you about this." He said: "The most honorable person is Joseph Allah's 
prophet, the son of Allah's prophet, the son of the faithful friend of Allah (Abraham)." (Sahih 
Al-Bukhari) However, the father was well aware of the jealousy of Joseph's brothers, so he 
warned him against telling his dream to his brothers. 

"O my son! Relate not your vision to your brothers, lest they arrange a plot against you. Verily! 
Satan is to man an open enemy! Thus will your Lord choose you and teach you the interpretation 
of dreams (an other things) and perfect His Favor on you and on the offspring of Jacob, as He 
perfected it on your fathers, Abraham, and Isaac aforetime! Verily! your Lord is All-Knowing, 
All-Wise." (Ch 12:5-6) 

Joseph heeded his father's warning. He did not tell his brothers what he had seen. It is well known 
that they hated him so much that it was difficult for him to feel secure telling them what was in his 
heart and in his dreams. 


www.islambasics.com 




Description of Joseph 


Joseph was eighteen years old, very handsome and robust, with a gentle temperament. He was 
respeetful, kind and eonsiderate. His brother Benjamin was equally pleasant. Both were from one 
mother, Raehel. Beeause of their refrned qualities, the father loved the two more than his other 
ehildren, and would not let them out of his sight. To proteet them, he kept them busy with work 
in the house garden. 

The Evil Plot of Joseph’s Brothers 

The seene of Jaeob and his son eloses. Another opens on Joseph's brothers plotting against him. 

"Truly, Joseph and his brother (Benjamin) are loved more by our father than we, but we are 
Usbah (a strong group). Really our father is in a plain error. Kill Joseph or cast him out to some 
other land, so that the favor of your father may be give to you alone, and after that you will be 
righteous folk (by intending repentance before committing the sin)." 

One from among them said: "Kill not Joseph, but if you must do something, throw him down to 
the bottom of a well, he will be picked up by some caravan of travelers." (Ch 12:8-10) 

The pages of the Old Testament say that Joseph told them his dream, whereas the Quran does not 
say that happened. Had it been so, the brothers would have said so themselves. The Old 
Testament elaims they had lost their own rights by him, and so they would kill him. Indeed Joseph 
kept his father's order and did not tell his brothers about his vision. 

In spite of this, his brothers sat down to eonspire against him. One of them asked: "Why does our 
father love Joseph more than us?" 

Another answered: "Perhaps beeause of his beauty." 

A third said: "Joseph and his brother oeeupied our father's heart." 

The first eomplained: "Our father has gone all astray." 

One of them suggested a solution to the matter; kill Joseph. 

"Where should we kill him?" 

"We should banish him away from these grounds." 

"We will send him to a distant land." 

"Why should we not kill him and have rest so that the favor of your father may be give to you 
alone?" 

However, Judah (Yahudh), the eldest and most intelligent among them, said: "There is no need to 
kill him when all you want is to get rid of him. Look here, let us throw him into a well and he will 



be picked up by a passing caravan. T hey will take him with them to a distant land. He will 
disappear from your father's sight and our purpose will be served with his exile. Then after that 
we shall repent for our crime and become good people once again." 

The discussion continued on the idea of dropping Joseph into a well, as it was seen as the safest 
solution. The plan to kill him was defeated; kidnap into a distant land was approved. It was the 
cleverest of ideas. 

The Brothers Approach Jacob 

Their next movement opened the scene between them and their father Jacob (pbuh): 

They said: "O our father! Why do you not trust us with Joseph, when we are indeed his well 
wishers? Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and verily we will take care of 
him." 

He (Jacob) said: "Truly, it saddens me that you should take him away. I fear lest a wolf should 
devour him, while you are careless of him." 

They said: "If a wolf devours him, while we are Usbah (a strong group) (to guard him), then 
surely we are the losers." (Ch 12:11-14) 

Jacob suggested a point, which had not occurred to them in their discussion: he feared that desert 
wolves would eat him! ithe wolves within them, or did he mean the wild wolves? No one but 
Allah knows. They coaxed their father to send Joseph with them; he agreed under their pressure. 

Joseph Thrown into the Well 

They were excited that they could now get rid of Joseph for after this they could stand a better 
chance of receiving their father's alfection. On leaving home, they went directly to the well, as 
they had planned, on the pretext of drinking water. One of them put his arms around Joseph and 
held him tightly. Startled by this unusual behavior, Joseph struggled to free himself More brothers 
rushed to hold him. One of them removed his shirt. Some more joined in to lift Joseph up and cast 
him into the deep well. Joseph's piteous pleas made no difference to their cruel hearts. 

Then Allah revealed to Joseph that he was safe and should not fear, for he would meet them again 
some day to remind them of what they had done. 

There was water in the well, which buoyed Joseph's body, so he was not harmed. He sat lonely in 
the water, then clung to a rock ledge overheard and climbed on top of it. his brothers left him in 
this desolate place. 

Then they killed a sheep and soaked Joseph's shirt in its blood. One brother said that they should 
swear to keep their deed a close secret. All of them took the oath. 

The Brothers Lie to Jacob 

"And they came to their father in the early part of the night weeping." (Ch 12:16) 

The scene here is dark night, broken by the crying of ten men. The father is sitting in his house 
when the sons enter, the darkness of night covering the darkness of their hearts and the darkness 
of their lies struggling to come out. Jacob wondered aloud: "Why this weeping? Has anything 



happened to our flock?" They answered crying; "O our father! We went racing with one another, 
and left Joseph by our belongings and a wolf devoured him; but you will never believe us even 
when we speak the truth. (Ch 12:17) 

"We were surprised after returning trom the race that Joseph was in the belly of the wolf" 

"We did not see him!" 

"You will not believe us even though we are truthful! we are telling you what happened!" 

"The wolf has eaten Joseph!" 

"This is Joseph's shirt. We foiled it soiled with blood, and did not find Joseph!" 

They brought his shirt stained with false blood. (Ch 12:18) 

Deep down in the heart Jacob knew that his beloved son was still alive and that his other sons 
were lying. He held the blood stained in his hands, spread it out and remarked: "What a merciful 
wolf! he ate up my beloved son without tearing his shirt!" Their faces turned red when he 
demanded more information, but each swore by Allah that he was telling the truth. The 
brokenhearted father burst into tears: 

"Nay! But your ownselves have made up a tale. So for me patience is more fitting. It is Allah 
Alone whose Help can be sought against that which you assert. " (Ch 12:18) 

The father acted wisely by praying for mighty patience, which is Ifee of doubt, and by trusting in 
Allah for help against what they had plotted against him and his son. This scene dims, and the 
scene opens in the well with which Joseph had been thrown. 

Joseph Finds Comfort in Allah 

In the dark well Joseph managed to And a stone ledge to hold onto. Around him was total 
darkness and an eerie silence. Fearful thoughts entered his mind: what would happen to him? 
Where would he And food? Why had his own brothers turned against him? Would his father know 
of his phght? His father's smile flashed before him recalling the love and affection he had always 
shown him. Joseph began to pray earnestly, pleading to Allah for salvation. Gradually his fear 
began to subside. His Creator was testing the young man with a great misfortune in order to 
infuse in him a spirit of patience and courage. Joseph, surrended himself to the will of his Lord. 

Joseph From the Well to Slavery 

The next scene shows the wide desert. At the horizon is a long line of camels, horses, and men; a 
caravan on its way to Egypt. The caravan of merchants halted at this famous well for water. A 
man lowered in his bucket. Joseph was startled by the bucket hurtling down and grabbed hold of 
it before it could land in the water. As the man began to haul he felt the load unusually heavy, so 
he peeped into the well. What he saw shocked him; a man was clinging to the rope! He held the 



rope tightly and shouted to his friends: "Better give me a hand fellows! Looks like I found real 
treasure in the well!" 

His companions rushed to the well and helped him to pull out the stranger holding onto the rope. 
Standing before them was a healthy, handsome youth, beaming with an angelic smile. They saw in 
him a handsome prize, for money was all that mattered to them. Immediately, they clapped iron 
shackles on his feet and took him along to Egypt, far away from his beloved homeland of Canaan. 
All over the Egyptian city the news spread that an unusually handsome, robust young slave was 
on sale. People gathered by the hundreds at the slave market, some were spectators, others were 
bidders the elite and the rich, each one craning his neck to view the handsome specimen, the 
auctioneer had a held day as the bidding went wild, each buyer trying to outbid the other. 
Eventually, the Aziz, the chief minister of Egypt, outbid all the others and took Joseph to his 
mansion. 

The Quran describes this scene as follows: 

"And there came a caravan of travelers; they sent their water drawer, and he let down his bucket 
into the well. He said: "What a good news! Here is a boy." So they hid him as merchandise (a 
slave). And Allah was the All Knower of what they did. 

They sold him for a low price, for a few Dhirhams (for a few silver coins). They were of those 
who regarded him insignificant. 

He (the man) from Egypt who bought him said to his wife: "Make his stay comfortable, may be 
he will profit us or we shall ado[t him as a son." Thus did We establish Joseph in the land, that 
We might teach him the interpretation of events. (Ch 12:19-21) 

See how Allah the Almighty reveals the substance of this long story from its beginning: And Allah 
has full power and control over His Affairs, but most of men know not. (Ch 12:21) 

The chains of slavery have closed on Joseph. He was cast into the well, deprived of his father, 
picked from the well, made a slave, sold at the market, and made the property of this man, the 
Aziz, the chief min i s ter. The hazards followed in quick succession, leaving Joseph helpless. 

Joseph’s Master 

What we see as hazards and slander is the first step of the ladder on Joseph's way to greatness. 
Allah is decisive in His action. His plan is carried out despite the plans of others and while theirs 
are still being made. So He spoils their plan, and Allah's promise is realized. Allah has promise 
Joseph prophethood. Love for Joseph was thrust into the heart of the man who bought him, and 
he was a man of no mean position. He was an important personage, one of the ruling class of 
Egypt. 

Therefore, Joseph was pleasantly surprised when the chief minister of Egypt ordered his men to 
remove the heavy shackles from his swollen feet. He was also surprised when he told Joseph not 
to betray his trust; he would not be ill-treated if he behaved himself Joseph smiled at his 
benefactor, thanked him, and promised to be loyal. 


Joseph felt at ease, for at last he was sheltered and would be well cared for. He thanked Allah 



over and over and wondered at the mysterious of life. Not so long ago he had been cast into a 
deep, dark well with no hope of ever coming out alive. Next he was rescued, then enslaved in iron 
shackles, and now he was moving freely in a luxurious mansion with enough food to enjoy. 
However, his heart ached with longing for his parents and brother Benjamin, and he shed tears 
daily. 

Joseph was made the personal attendant of the chief minister's wife. He was obedient and 
ever-obliging. With his pleasant manners and charming behavior, he won everybody's heart. 

Joseph's handsomeness became the talk of the town. People referred to him as the most attractive 
man they had ever seen and wrote poetry about him. His face carried immaculate beauty. The 
purity of his inner soul and his heart showed in his face, increasing his beauty. People from afar 
came to the city to have a glimpse of him. The prettiest of maidens and the richest of ladiesnursthe 
to possess him, but not once did he show haughtiness or conceit, he was always humble and polite. 

Joseph's Qualities 

The days passed and Joseph grew. Almighty Allah said: 

"And when he (Joseph) attained his full manhood, We gave him wisdom and knowledge (the 
Prophethood), thus We reward the doers of good. (Ch 12:22) 

He was given wisdom in affairs and knowledge of life and its conditions. He as given the art of 
conversation, captivating those who heard him. He was given nobility and self restraint, which 
made him an irresistible personality. His master soon knew that Allah had graced him with Joseph. 
He understood that Joseph was the most honest, straightforward and noble person he had met in 
his life. Therefore, he put Joseph in charge of his household, honored him, and treated him as a son. 

Zulaikha's Feelings for Joseph 

The wife of the chief minister, Zulaikha, watched Joseph from day to day. She at with him, talked 
with him, listened to him, and her wonder increased over the passion of time. 

Joseph was soon confronted (with his second trial). The chief minister's wife, Zulaikha could not 
resist the handsome Joseph, and her obsession with him caused her sleepless nights. She fell in 
love with him, and it was painful for her to be so close to a man, yet be unable to hold him. Yet, 
she was not a wayward woman, for in her position she could get any man she desired. By all 
accounts, she must have been a very pretty and intelligent lady, or why would the chief minister 
have chosen her of all the pretty women in the kingdom? Although she bore him no child, he 
would not take another wife, as he loved her passionately. The Quran raises the curtain on the 
scene of this fierce and devouring love on the part of the lady. 

Allah the Almighty told us: 

"And she, in whose house he was, sought to seduce him (to do an evil act), she closed the doors 
and said: "come on, O you. "He said: "I seek refuge in Allah (or Allah forbid)! Truly he (your 
husband) is my master! He made my stay agreeable! (So I will never betray him). Verily, the 



Zalimun (wrong, evildoers) will never be successful." Indeed she did desire him and he would 
have inclined to her desire had he not seen the evidence of his Lord. Thus it was, that We might 
turn away from evil and illegal sexual intercourse. Surely, he was one of Our chosen, guided 
slaves. (Ch 12:23-24) 

Joseph’s Feelings for Zulaikha 

Commentators are una nim ous about her intention of disobedienee but disagree about his own 
intention. There are those who say that she tempted him and he tempted her to sin, although he 
did not foUow through with his intent. Others say that she merely wanted him to kiss her, and he 
attempted to strike her. Yet others say that this anxiety had been there before this ineident. There 
was a psychologieal disturbance in Joseph when he reached adolescence, which Almighty Allah 
rid him of 

The safest commentary for us is that there is temptation and resistance in the verse, for He Most 
High stated: 

"And indeed she did desire him and he would have inclined to her desire... (Ch 12:24) 

Abu Ubaidah said that this is a temptation and resistance meaning that she had tried to seduce 
him; had he not seen the proof of Allah, he would have been seduced. This is in keeping with the 
infalhbility of prophets, as it suits the words, which immediately follow.' 

"Thus it was that We might turn away from him evil and illegal sexual intercourse, surely, he was 
one of Our chosen, guided slaves. (Ch 12:24) 

This verse proves that Joseph was an upright worshipper of Allah; it also testifies to his rescue 
from the authority of Satan. The Almighty said to the devil (Iblis) on the Day of Creation: 

"Certainly, you shall no authority over My slaves, except those who follow you of the Ghawin 
(Mushrikeen, and those who go astray, criminals, polytheists, and evildoers, etc) "{Ch. 15:42) 

Zulaikha's False Accusation 

Joseph's refusal only heightened her passion. As he moved to the door to escape, she ran after him 
and caught hold of his shirt, like a drowning person clinging to the boat. In her tugging she tore 
his shirt and held the torn piece in her hand. They reached the door together. It opened suddenly, 
there stood her husband and a relative of hers. 

Almighty Allah said.' 

"So they raced with one another to the door, and she tore his shirt from the back. They both 
found her lord (her husband) at the door. (Ch 12:25) 


As he opened the door, he saw her husband standing in front of him. The sly woman immediately 
changed her tone to anger, and, showing the tom piece of the shirt in her hand, asked her 



husband: 


"What is the recompense (punishment) for him who intended an evil design against your wife, 
except that he be put in prison or a painful torment?" (Ch 12:25) 

She was now accusing Joseph of molesting her, to give the impression that she was innocent and 
a victim of Joseph's sexual desire. Though bewildered Joseph denied it: 

"It was she that sought to seduce me." (Ch 12:26) 

The shirt was passed from hand to hand, while she watched. The witness (her cousin) looked at it 
and found that it was torn at the back. The evidence showed that she was guilty. The disappointed 
husband remarked to his wife.' "Surely, it is a plot of you women! Certainly mighty is you plot!" 
(Ch 12:28) 

The wise and just Aziz apologized to Joseph for his wife's indecency. He also instructed her to 
beg Joseph's forgiveness for accusing him falsely. Allah the Almighty narrated this incident thus: 
He (Joseph) said: 

"It was she that sought to seduce me," and a witness of her household bore witness saying: "If it 
be that his shirt is torn from the front, then her tale is true, and he is a liar! but if it be that his 
shirt is torn from the back, then she has told a lie and he is speaking the truth!" 

So when he (the husband) saw his (Joseph's) shirt was torn at the back; (her husband) said: 
"Surely, it is a plot ofyou women! certainly mighty is your plot! O Joseph! turn away from this! 
(O woman)! Ask forgiveness for your sin. Verily, you were of the sinful. "(Ch 12:26-29 Quran). 

Zulaikha is Ridiculed by the People 

An incident like this cannot remain a secret in a house filled with servants, and the story spread. 
Women began to see her behavior as scandalous. They remarked: 

"The wife of Al-Aziz is seeking to seduce her (slave) young man, indeed she loves him violently; 
verily, we see her in plain error." (Ch 12:30) 

Zulaikha's Plan to Regain Her Reputation 

Naturally their gossip distressed Zulaikha. She honestly believed that it was not easy for any 
women to resist a man as handsome as Joseph. To prove her helplessness, she planned to subject 
the women to the same temptation she faced. She invited them to a lavish banquet. No one so 
invited would want to miss the honor of dining with the chief minister's wife; besides, they secretly 
harbored the desire to meet the handsome Joseph face to face. Some of her close friends jokingly 
said they would come only if she introduced them to Joseph. 

The invitation was restricted to ladies. The banquet began, laughter and mirth abounded. 

Etiquette dictated that the ladies not mention the topic of Joseph. They were shocked, therefore. 



when Zulaikha opened the topie. "I have heard of those who say I have fallen in love with the 
young Hebrew man, Joseph." Silenee fell upon the banquet. At onee all the guests hands stopped, 
and all eyes fell on the ehief min i s ter’s wife. She said, while giving orders for the fruit to be 
served; "I admit that he is eharming fellow. I do not deny that I love him. I have loved him for a 
long time." 

The Women's Reaction to Joseph 

The eonfession of the ehief min i s ter's wife removed the tension among the ladies. After fini s hing 
their dinner, the guests began eutting their fruit. At that very moment she summoned Joseph to 
make his appearanee. He entered the hall graeefully, his gaze lowered. Zulaikha ealled him by his 
name and he raised his head. The guests were astonished and dumbfounded. His faee was shining 
and full of man angelie beauty. It refleeted eomplete innoeenee, so mueh so that one eould feel the 
peaee of mind in the depth of his soul. 

They exelaimed in astoni s hment while eontinuing to out the fruit. All their eyes were on Joseph. 

So it was that the women began to out their palms absent mindly without feeling that they had out 
them. 

The presenoe of Joseph at the soene of drama was so effeotive that blflowedwithouttheir feeling 
pain. One of the ladies gasped: "Good graoious!" Another whispered: "This is not a mortal 
being!" Another stammered, patting her hair: "This is but a noble angel." 

Then the ehief minister's wife stood up and announoed; "This is the one for whom I have been 

blamed. I do not deny that I tempted him. You have been enohanted by Joseph, and see what has 

happened to your hands. I have tempted him, and if he does not do what I want of him he shall be imprisoned." 

The Women's Reaction - Quranic 

Almighty Allah related the seene of the banquet in His words; 

“So when she heard of their accusation, 

she sent for them and prepared a banquet for them; she gave each one of them a knife (to cut the 
foodstuff with), and she said (to Joseph): "Come out before them." Then, when they saw him, 
they exalted him (at his beauty) and (in their astonishment) cut their hands. They said: "how 
perfect is Allah (or Allah forbid)! No man is this! This is none other than a noble angel!" 

She said: "This is he (the young man) about whom you did blame me (for his love) and I did seek 
to seduce him, but he refused. And now if he refuses to obey my order, he shall certainly be cast 
into prison, and will be one of those who are disgraced." 

He said: "O my Lord! Prison is more to my liking than that to which they invite me. Unless You 
turn away their plot from me, I will feel inclined towards them and be one of those who commit 
sin and deserve blame or those who do deeds of the ignorants." 

So his Lord answered his inovocation and turned away from him their plot. Verily he is the All 
Hearer, the All Knower. ” (Ch 12:31-34) 



That evening, Zulaikha convinced her husband that the only way to save her honor was to put 
Joseph in prison; otherwise she would not be able to control herself or to safeguard his prestige. 
The chief minister knew Joseph was absolutely innocent, that he was a young man of honor, a 
loyal servant, and he loved him for these reasons. It was not an easy decision for him to put an 
innocent man behind bars. However, he was left with no choice. He reasoned that Joseph's honor 
would also be safeguarded if he was kept out of Zulaikha's sight. That night, with a heavy heart, 
the chief minister sent Joseph to prison. 

Joseph's Time in Prison 

Prison was Joseph's third test. During this period AUah blessed him with an extraordinary gift; the 
abihty to interpret dreams. At about the same time two other men landed in the prison. One was 
the cupbearer of the king; the other was the king's cook. The two men sensed that Joseph was not 
a common criminal, for an aura of piety glowed on his face. Both men had vivid dreams, and they 
were anxious to have them explained. The king's cook dreamed that he stood in a place with 
bread on his head, and two birds were eating the bread. The cupbearer dreamed that he was 
serving the king wine. The two went to Joseph and told him their dreams, asking him to give them 
their meaning. 

First, Joseph called them to Allah. Then he said that the cook would be crucified until he died and 
that the cupbearer would return to the service of the king. Joseph told the cupbearer to remember 
him to the king and to say that there was a wronged soul called Joseph in prison. What Joseph 
predicted did happen; the cook was crucified and the cupbearer returned to the palace. 

After the cupbearer returned to service, Satan made him forget to mention Joseph's name to the 
king. Therefore, Joseph remained in prison for a few years, but he made patience his own, praying 
to Allah. 

Joseph's Time in Prison - Quranic 

Almighty Allah narrated: 

"And there entered with him two young men in the prison. One of them said: "Verily, I saw 
myself (in a dream) pressing wine." The other said: "Verily, I saw myself (in a dream) carrying 
bread on my head and birds were eating thereof." They said: Inform us of the interpretation of 
this. Verily, we think you are one of those Muhsineen (doers of good)." 

He said: "No food will come to you (in wakefulness or in dream) as your provision but I will 
inform (in wakefulness) its interpretation before it (the food) comes. This is of that which my 
Lord has taught me. Verily, I have abandoned the religion of a people that believe not in Allah 
and are disbeliveers in the Hereafter. And I have followed the religion of my fathers, - Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob and never could we attribute any partners whatsoever to Allah. This is from the 
Grace of Allah to us and to mankind, but most men think not (i.e. they neither believe in Allah 
nor worship Him). 

"O two companions of the prison I Are many different lords (gods) better or Allah, the One, the 
Irresistible? You do not worship besides Him but only names which you have named (forged). 



you and your fathers, for which Allah has sent down no authority. The command (or the 
judgment) is for none but Allah. He has commanded (His Monotheism), that is the true, straight 
religion, but most men know not. 

"O two companions of the prisonl As for one of you, he (as a servant) will pour out wine for his 
lord (King or master) to drink; and as for the other, he will be crucified and birds will eat from 
his head. Thus is the case judged concerning which you both did inquire." 

And he said to the one whom he knew to be saved: "Mention me to your lord (your King, so to 
get me out of the prison)." But Satan made him forget to mention it to his lord (or Satan made 
Joseph to forget the remembrance of his Lord (Allah) as to ask for His Help, instead of others). 
So Joseph stayed in prison a few more years. (Ch 12:36-42). 

The King’s Dream 

The scene in the prison closes; a new scene opens in the bedchamber of the king. The king is 
asleep. He sees himself on the banks of the Nile river. The water is receding before him, becoming 
mere mud. The fish begin to skip and jump in the mud. Seven fat cows come out of the river 
followed by seven lean cows. The seven lean ones devour the seven fat ones. The king is terrified. 
The seven ears of green grain grow on the riverbanks and disappear in the mud. One the same 
spot grow seven dray ears of grain. 

The king awoke Ifightened, shocked, and depressed, not knowing what all this meant. He sent for 
the sorcerers, priests and ministers, and told them his dream. 

The sorcerers said: "This is a mixed up dream. How can any of that be? It is a nightmare." 

The priests said: "Perhaps his majesty had a heavy supper." 

The chief minister said: "Could it be that his majesty was exposed and did not draw the blanket up 
at night?" 

The king's jester said, jokingly: "His majesty is beginning to grow old, and so his dreams are 
confused." 

They reached an unanimous conclusion that it was only a nightmare. 

The news reached the cupbearer. He recollected the dream he had in prison and compared it to 
the king's dream, and, therefore Joseph came to mind. He ran to the king to tell him about Joseph, 
who was the only one capable to interpreting the dream. The cupbearer said : "He had asked me 
to remember him to you, but I forgot." The king sent the cupbearer to ask Joseph about the 
dream. 

Joseph's Interpretation of the Dream 

Joseph interpreted it to him: "There will be seven years of abundance. If the land is properly 
cultivated, there will be an excess of good harvest, more than the people will need. This should be 
stored. Thereafter, seven years of famine will follow, during which time the excess grain could be 
used." 

He also advised that during the famine they should save some grain to be used for seed for the 
next harvest. Joseph then added; "After seven years of drought, there will be a year during which 
water will be plentiful. If the water is properly used, grapevines and olive trees will grow in 
abundance, providing plenty of grapes and olive oil." 

The cupbearer hurried back with the good news. The king was fascinated by Joseph's 



interpretation. 


The Dream and Interpretation - Quranic 

Almighty Allah narrated this ineident thus: 

"And the king of Egypt said: "Verily, I saw in a dream seven fat cows, whom seven lean cows 
were devouring, and seven green ears of corn and seven others dry. O notables! Explain to me 
my dream if it be that you can interpret dreams." 

They said: "Mixed up false dreams and we are not skilled in the interpretation of dreams." 

Then the man who was released (one of the two who were in prison), now at length remembered 
and said: "I will tell you its interpretation, so send me forth." 

(Tie said): "O Joseph, the man of truth! Explain to us (the dream) of seven fat cows whom seven 
lean ones were devouring, and of seven green ears of corn and seven others dry, that I may 
return to the people, and that they may know." Joseph said: "For seven consecutive years, you 
shall sow as usual and that the harvest which you reap you shall leave in ears, all —except a 
little of it which you may eat. Then will come after that seven hard years, which will devour what 
you have laid by in advance for them, all except a little of that which you have guarded (stored). 
Then thereafter will come a year in which people will have abundant rain and in which they will 
press wine and oil." (Ch 12:43-49) 

Joseph’s Innocence Proved 

The king was greatly astonished. Who eould this person be? He eommanded that Joseph be set 
free from prison and presented to him at onee. The king's envoy went to fetch him immediately, 
but Joseph refused to leave the prison unless his innocence was proven. Perhaps they accused him 
of cutting the ladies hands, or trying to rape them. Perhaps any other false accusation was made. 
We do not know exactly what was said to the people to justify Joseph's sentence to prison. The 
envoy returned to the king. The king asked him: "Where is Joseph? Did I not command you to 
fetch him?" 

The envoy replied: "He refused to leave until his innocence is established regarding the ladies who 
cut their hands." 

The king ordered: "Bring the wives of the ministers and the wife of the chief minister at once." 
The king felt that Joseph had been harmed unfairly but he did not know exactly how. The wife of 
the chief minister came with the other ministers' wives. The king asked: "What is the story of 
Joseph? What do you know about him? Is it true that...?" 

One of the ladies interrupted the king exclaiming: "Allah forbid!" 

A second said: "We know of no evil he has done." 

A third said: "He enjoys the innocence of angels." 

The eyes of everyone turned to the wife of the chief minister. She now wore a wrinkled face and 



had lost weight. She had been overwhelmed by sorrow over Joseph while he was in prison. She 
boldly eonfessed that she had lied and he had told the truth. 


"I tempted him; but he refused." She eonfirmed what she said, not out of fear of the king or the 
other ladies, but for Joseph to know that she had never betrayed him during his absence, for he 
was stiU in her mind and soul. Of all creation he was the only one she cared for, so she confirmed 
his innocence before all. 

Joseph’s Innocence Proved - Quranic 

Almighty Allah said: And the king said: "Bring him to me." But, when the messenger came to him 
(Joseph) said: "Return to your lord, and ask him, 'what happened to the women who cut their 
hands? Surely, my Lord (Allah) is Well Aware of their plot." 

(The king) said (to the women): "What was your affair when you did seek to seduce Joseph? " The 
women said: "Allah forbid! No evil know we against him!" The wife of Al Aziz said: "Now the 
truth is manifest to all, it was I who sought to seduce him and he is surely one of the truthful." 
(Then Joseph said: "I asked for this inquiry) in order that he (Al-Aziz) may know that I betrayed 
him not in secret. And, verily! Allah guides not the plot of the betrayers. And I free not myself 
(from the blame). Verily, the human self is inclined to evil, except when my Lord bestows His 
Mercy (upon whom He wills). Verily, my Lord is Oft-Forgiving, most Merciful." (Ch 12:50-53). 

Zulaikha's Life Afterwards 

Reflecting on these verses suggests that she had turned to Joseph's religion, monotheism. His 
imprisonment was a great turning point in her life. After this, the Quranic style neglects the story 
of the chief min i s ter's wife completely. We do not know what happened to her after she gave her 
clear evidence. Yet still, there are legends about her. It has been said that after her husband died 
she married Joseph, and, behold she was a virgin. She confessed that her husband had been old 
and had never touched women. Other legends said that she lost her sight, weeping for Joseph. She 
abandoned her palace and wandered in the streets of the city. 

However, the lady disappeared Ifom the Quranic narrative at the suitable stage, at the climax of 
her trouble. Perhaps she lingers in memory longer than if we had known the ending. 

Joseph's High Position 

The king informed Joseph that his innocence was established and ordered him to come to the 
palace for an interview. The king recognized his noble qualities. When Joseph came, the king 
spoke to him in his tongue. Joseph's replies astonished the king with his cultural refinement and 
wide knowledge. 

Then the conversation turned to the dream. Joseph advised the king to start planning for years of 
famine ahead. He informed him that the famine would afiect not only Egypt but the neighboring 
countries as well. The king ofiered him a high position. Joseph asked to be made controller of the 
granaries, so that he could guard the nation's harvest and thereby safeguard it during the 
anticipated drought. By this Joseph did not mean to seize an opportunity or personal gain; he 
merely wanted to rescue hungry nations for a personal gain; he merely wanted to rescue hungry 



nations for a period of seven years. It was a sheer nobleness on his part in that he wanted to 
ensure that many people would not die as a result. 


Joseph’s High Position - Quranic 

Almighty Allah said; 

"And the king said: "Bring him to me that I may attach him to my person." Then, when he spoke 
to him, he said: "Verily, this day, you are with us high in rank and full trusted." 

Joseph said: "Set me over the store houses of the land; I will indeed guard them with full 
knowledge." (as a minister of finance in Egypt, in place of Al-Aziz who was dead at that time). 
Thus did We give full authority to Joseph in the land, to take possession therein, as when or 
where he likes. We bestow of Our Mercy on whom We please, and We make not to be lost the 
reward of Al Muhsineen (the good-doers). (Ch 12:54-57). 

Joseph Meets His Brothers 

The wheels of time turned. During the seven good years, Joseph had full control over the 
cultivation, harvesting, and storage of crops. During the following seven years, drought followed 
and famine spread throughout the region, including Canaan, the homeland of Joseph. Joseph 
advised the king that as his kingdom was blessed with reserved grain, he should sell his grain to 
the needy nations at a fair price. The king agreed, and the good news spread all over the region. 

Jacob sent ten of his sons, all except Benjamin, to Egypt to purchase provisions. Joseph heard of 
the ten brothers who had come from afar and who could not speak the language of the Egyptians. 
When they called on him to purchase their needs, Joseph immediately recognized his brothers, but 
they did not know him. How could they? To them Joseph no longer existed; he had been thrown 
into the deep, dark well many years ago! 

Joseph received them warmly. After supplying them with provisions, he asked where they had 
come from. They explained; "We are eleven brothers, the children of a noble prophet. The 
youngest is at home tending to the needs of our aging father." 

On hearing this, Joseph's eyes filled with tears; his longing for home swelled up in his heart, as 
well as his longing for his beloved parents and his loving brother Benjamin. "Are you truthful 
people?" Joseph asked them. 

Perturbed they replied, "What reason should we have to state an untruth?" 

"If what you say is true then bring your brother as proof and I will reward you with double 
rations. But if you do not bring him to me, it would be better if you do not return," Joseph warned 
them. 

They assured him that they would gladly fulfill his command but that they would have to get their 
father's permission. As an inducement to return with their brother, Joseph ordered his servant to 
secretly place the purse, with the money they had paid, into one of their grain sacks. 



Joseph Meets His Brothers - Quranic 


Allah the Almighty said: 

"And Joseph's brethren came and they entered unto him, and he recognized them, but they 
recognized him not. And when he had furnished them forth with provisions (according to their 
need), he said: "Bring me a brother of yours from your father; (he meant Benjamin). See you not 
that I give full measure, and that I am the best of the hosts? But if you bring him onto me, there 
shall be no measure of corn for you with me, nor shall you come near me." 

They said: "We shall try to get permission for him from his father, and verily, we shall do it." 
And (Joseph) told his servants to put their money (with which they had bought the corn) into 
their bags, so that they might know it when they go back to their people, in order that they might 
comeback. (Ch 12:58-62) 

The Brothers Return to Canaan 

The scene dims in Egypt and hghts in Canaan. The brothers returned to their father. Before they 
could unload the camels, they greeted him, then reproved him: "We were denied some supplies 
because you did not let your son go with us. They would not give us food for absentees. Why 
would you not entrust him with us? Please, send him with us, and we shall take care of him." 

Jacob became sad and told them: "I will not permit Benjamin to travel with you. I will not part 
with him, for I entrusted Joseph to you and you failed me." 

Later, when they opened their grain sacks, they were surprised to find the money purse returned 
intact. They rushed to their father; "Look, father! The noble official has returned our money; this 
is surely proof that he would not harm our brother and it can only benefit us." But Jacob refused 
to send Benjamin with them. 

After some time, when they had no more grain, Jacob asked them to travel to Egypt for more. 
They reminded him of the warning the Egyptian official had given them. They could not return 
without Benjamin. Jacob agreed, but not before he extracted a pledge Ifom them. "I will not send 
him with you unless you give me a pledge in Allah's name that you shall bring him back to me as 
safely as you take him." They gave their solemn pledge. He reminded them: "Allah is witness to 
your pledge." He then advised them to enter the city through several different gates. 

The Brothers Return to Canaan - Quranic 

Almighty Allah narrated: 

"So when they returned to their father, they said: "O our father! No more measure of grain shall 
we get (unless we take our brother). So send our brother with us, and we shall get our measure 
and truly we will guard him." 

He said: "Can I entrust him to you except as I entrust his brother (Joseph) to you aforetime? But 
Allah is the best to guard, and He is the Most Merciful of those Who show mercy." 

And when thopened their bags, they found their money had been returned to them. They said: "O 
our father! What more can we desire? This, our money has been returned to us, so we shall get 
more food for our family, and we shall guard our brother and add one more measure of a 



camel's load. This quantity is easy (for the king to give)." 

He (Jacob) said: "I will not send him with you until you swear a solemn oath to me in Allah's 
Name, that you will bring him back to me unless you are yourselves surrounded (by enemies, 
etc). And when they had sworn their solemn oath, he said: "Allah is the Witness over what we 
have said." 

And he said: "O my sons! Do not enter by one gate, but by different gates, and I cannot avail 
you against Allah at all. Verily! The decision rests only with Allah. In Him, I put my trust and let 
all those that trust, put their trust in Him. " (Ch 12:63-67 Quran). 

Jacob blessed them on their departure and prayed to AUah for their protection. The brothers 
undertook the long journey to Egypt, taking good care of Benjamin. 

Joseph and Benjamin Meet 

Joseph weleomed them heartily, although, with diflfieulty, he suppressed the desire to embrace 
Benjamin that arose within him. He prepared a feast for them and seated them in pairs. Joseph 
arranged to sit next to his beloved brother Benjamin, who began to weep. Joseph asked him why 
he was crying. He replied: "If my brother Joseph had been here, I would have sat next to him." 
That night, when Joseph and Benjamin were alone in a room, Joseph asked whether he would 
have him for a brother. Benjamin respectfully answered that he regarded his host as a wonderful 
person, but he could never take the plaee of his brother. Joseph broke down, and amidst flowing 
tears said; "My loving brother, I am the brother who was lost and whose name you are constantly 
repeating. Fate has brought us together after many years of separation. This is Allah's favor. But 
let it be a secret between us for the time being." Benjamin flung his arms around Joseph and both 
brothers shed tears of joy. 

A Thief Among the Brothers 

The next day, while their bags were being filled with grains to load onto the camels, Joseph 
ordered one of his attendants to place the king's gold eup whieh was used for measuring the grain 
into Benjamin's saddlebag. When the brothers were ready to set out, the gates were locked, and 
the eourt crier shouted: "O you travelers, you are thieves!" The accusation was most unusual, and 
the people gathered around Joseph's brothers. 

"What have you lost?" his brothers inquired. 

A soldier said: "The king's golden cup. Whoever can trace it we will give a beast load of grain." 

Joseph's brothers said with all innocence: "We have not come here to corrupt the land and steal." 

Joseph's oflhcers said (as he had instructed them): What punishment should you choose for the 
thief?" 

The brothers answered: "Aecording to our law, whoever steals beeomes a slave to the owner of 
the property." 


www.islambasics.com 



The oflhcers agreed: "We shall apply your law instead of the Egyptian law, which provides for 
imprisonment." 


The chief officer ordered his soldiers to start searching the caravan. Joseph was watching the 
incident Ifom high upon his throne. He had given instructions for Benjamin's bag to be the last to 
be searched. When they did not find the cup in the bags of the ten older brothers, the brothers 
sighed in relief 

Benjamin is Accused 

There remained only the bag of their youngest brother. Joseph said, intervening for the first time, 
that there was no need to search his saddle as he did not look like a thief 

His brothers alfirmed: "We will not move an inch unless his saddle is searched as well. We are the 
sons of a noble man, not thieves." 

The soldiers reached in their hands and pulled out the king's cup. The brothers exclaimed: "If he 
steals now, a brother of his has stolen before." They strayed Ifom the present issue in order to 
blame a particular group of the children of Jacob. 

Joseph heard their resentment with his own ears and was filled with regret. Yet, he swallowed his 
own resentment, keeping it within. He said to himself, "you went further and fared worse; it shall 
go bad with you and worse hereafter, and Allah knows your intention." 

Silence fell upon them after these remarks by the brothers. Then they forgot their secret 
satisfaction and thought of Jacob; they had taken an oath with him that they would not betray his 
son. They began to beg Joseph for mercy. "Joseph, O minister! Take one of us instead. He is the 
son of a good man, and we can see you are a good man." 

Joseph answered calmly: "How can you want to set tree the man who has stolen the king's cup? It 
would be sinful." 

The brothers went on pleading for mercy. However, the guards said that the king had spoke and 
his word was law. Judah, the eldest, was much worried and told the others: "We promised our 
father in the name of Allah not to fail him . I will, therefore, stay behind and will only return if my 
father permits me to do so." 

Joseph Meets Benjamin and the Accusation - Quranic 

Regarding this scene. Almighty Allah said: 

"And when they entered according to their father's advice, it did not avail them in the least 
against (the Will of) Allah, it was but a need of Jacob's inner self which he discharged. And 
verily, he was endowed with knowledge because We had taught him, but most men know not. And 
when they went in before Joseph, he betook his brother (Benjamin) to himself and said: "Verily! I 
am your brother, so grieve not for what they used to do." 

So when he had furnished them forth with their provisions, he put the golden bowl in his 
brother's bag. Then a crier cried: "Oyou in the caravan! Surely, you are thieves!" 

They, turning towards them said: "What is that you have missed?" 

They said: "We have missed the golden bowl of the king and for him who produces it is the 
reward of a camel load; I will be bound by it." 



They said: "By Allah! Indeed you know that we came not to make mischief in the land, and we 
are no thieves!" 

They (Joseph's brothers) said: "The penalty should be that he, in whose bag it is found, should 
be held for the punishment of the crime. Thus we punish the Zalimeen (wrongdoers, etc)!" 

So he (Joseph) began the search in their bags before the bag of his brother. Then he brought it 
out of his brother's bag. Thus did We plan for Joseph. He could not take his brother by the law 
of the king (as a slave), except that Allah willed it. So Allah made the brothers to bind 
themselves with their way of 'punishment, i.e. enslaving of a thief.' We raise to degrees whom We 
please, but over all those endowed with knowledge is the All-Knowing (Allah). 

They (Joseph's brothers) said: "If he steals, there was a brother of his (Joseph) who did steal 
before him." But these things did Joseph keep in himself, revealing not the secrets to them. He 
said (within himself): "You are in the worst case, and Allah knows best the truth of what you 
assert!" 

They said : "O ruler of the land! Verily, he has an old father who will grieve for him, so take one 
of us in his place. Indeed we think that you are one of the good doers." 

He said: "Allah forbid! That we should take anyone but him with whom we found our property. 
Indeed if we did so, we shall be Zalimun (wrongdoers)." 

So, when they despaired of him, they held a conference in private. The eldest among them said: 
"Know you not that your father did take an oath from you in Allah's name, and before this did 
fail in your duty with Joseph? Therefore, I will not leave this land until my father permits me, or 
Allah decides my case (by releasing Benjamin) and He is the Best of the judges. " (Ch 12:68-80 
Quran). 

Joseph’s Plan 

The brothers left enough provisions behind for Judah, who stayed at a tavern awaiting the fate of 
Benjamin. In the meantime, Joseph kept Benjamin in his house as his personal guest and told him 
how he had devised the plot to put the king's eup in his bag, in order to keep him behind, so as to 
proteet him. He was also glad that Judah had stayed behind, as he was a good hearted brother. 
Joseph seeretly arranged to wateh over Judah's well being. 

Joseph's plan in sending the others baek was to test their sineerity, to see if they would eome baek 
for the two brothers they had left behind. 

The Brothers Confront Jacob 

When they arrived home, they entered upon their father ealling: "O our father! Your son has 
stolen!" 

He was puzzled, seareely believing the news. He was overwhelmed with sorrow and his eyes wept 
tears. "Patienee be with me; perhaps Allah will return all of them to me. He is Most Knowing, 
Most Wise." A pal of lonesomeness elosed over him, yet he found eonsolation in patienee and 
trusted in Allah. 

The Brothers Confront Jacob - Quranic 

Allah revealed to us what happened at their meeting with their father: 



"Return to your father and say: 'O our father! Verily, your son (Benjamin) has stolen, and we 
testify not except according to what we know, and we could not known the unseen! And ask the 
people of the town where we have been, and the caravan in which we returned and indeed we are 
telling the truth."" 

He (Jacob) said: "Nay, but your ownselves have beguiled you into something. So patience is 
most fitting for me. Maybe Allah will bring them back all to me. Truly He! Only He is 
All-Knowing, All-Wise." 

And he turned away from them and said: "Alas, my grieffor Joseph!" And he lost his sight 
because of the sorrow that he was suppressing. fCh 12:81-84) 

Jacob’s Request to Find Joseph 

The father was deeply hurt. Only prayer eould eomfort him and strengthen his faith and patienee. 
Weeping all those years for his beloved son Joseph - and now one more of his best sons had been 
snatched from him - Jacob almost lost his sight. 

The other sons pleaded with him: "O father, you are a noble prophet and a great messenger of 
Allah. Unto you descended revelation and people received guidance and faith from you. Why are 
you destroying yourself in this way?" 

Jacob replied: "Rebuking me will not lessen my grief Only the return of my sons will comfort me. 
My sons, go in search of Joseph and his brother; do not despair of Allah's mercy." 

Jacob's Request to Find Joseph - Quranic 

Allah, the Almighty told us: 

"They said: "By Allah! You will never cease remembering Joseph until you become weak with old 
age, or until you be of the dead." 

He said: "I only complain of my grief and sorrow to Allah, and I know from Allah that which you 
know not. O my sons! Go you and inquire about Joseph and his brother and never give up hope 
of Allah's Mercy. Certainly no one despairs of Allah's Mercy, except the people who disbelieve." 
(Ch 12:85-87 Quran). 

Joseph Reveals Himself 

The caravan set out for Egypt. The brothers - on their way to see the chief minister (Joseph) - 
were poor and depressed. 

On reaching Egypt they collected Judah and called on Joseph, to whom they pleaded: 

"O ruler of the land! A hard time has hit us and our family, and we have brought but poor 
capital, so pay us full measure and be charitable to us. Truly, Allah does reward the charitable." 
(Ch 12:88). 

At the end, they begged Joseph. They asked alms of him, appealing to his heart, reminding him 
that Allah rewards alms givers. At this moment, in the midst of their plight, Joseph spoke to them 



in their native tongue saying: 


"Do you know what you did with Joseph and his brother when you were ignorant?" 

They said: "Are you indeed Joseph? " 

He said: "I am Joseph, and his is my brother (Benjamin). Allah has indeed been Gracious to us. 
Verily, he who fears Allah with obedience to Him (by abstaining from sins and evil deeds, and by 
performing righteous good deeds), and is patient, then surely, Allah makes not the reward of the 
good doers to be lost." 

They said: "By Allah! Indeed Allah has preferred you above us, and we certainly have been 
sinners." (Ch 12:89-91) 

The brothers began to tremble with fear, but Joseph eomforted them: 

"No reproach on you this day, may Allah forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who 
show mercy!" (Ch 12:92) 

Jacob Learns About Joseph 

Joseph embraced them, and together they wept with joy. It was not possible for Joseph to leave 
his responsible office without proper replacement, so he advised his brothers: 

"Go with this shirt of mine, and cast it over the face of my father, he will become clear-sighted, 
and bring to me all your family." (ch 12:93) 

And so the caravan headed back for Palestine. We lave the scene in Egypt and return to Palestine 
and the house of Jacob. The old man is sitting in his room; tears have been flowing down his 
cheeks. He stands up all of a sudden, dresses and goes out to his son's wives. Then he lifts up his 
face to Heaven and sn iff s the air. 

The wife of the eldest son remarked: "Jacob has come out of his room today." The women 
inquired about what was amiss. There was a hin t of a smile on his face. The others asked him : 

"How do you feel today?" 

He answered: "I can smell Joseph in the air." 

The wives left him alone, saying to one another that there was no hope for the old man. 'he will 
die of weeping over Joseph.' 

"Did he talk about Joseph's shirt?" 

"I do not know. He said he could smell him; perhaps he has gone mad." 

That day the old man wanted a cup of milk to break his fast, for he had been fasting. At night he 
changed his clothes. The caravan was traveling in the desert with Joseph's shirt hidden among the 



grain. It neared the old man's estate. He gestieulated in his room, and then he prayed a long time, 
lifting his hands to heaven and snitSng the air. He was weeping as the shirt was nearing him. 

And when the caravan departed, their father said: "I do indeed feel the smell of Joseph, if only 
you think me not a dotard (a person who has weakness of mind because of old age)." 

They said: "By Allah! Certainly, you are in your old error." 

Then, when the bearer of the glad tidings arrived, he cast the shirt over his face, and he became 
clear sighted. He said: "Did I not say to you, I know from Allah that which you know not. "" 

They said: "O our father! Ask Forgiveness from Allah for our sins, indeed we have been 
sinners." (Ch 12:94-97) 

Jacob and Joseph (PBUT) Meet 

The story began with a dream and it ends with the interpretation of the dream. Almighty Allah 
narrated: 

He said: "I will ask my Lord for forgiveness for you, verily. He! Only He is the Oft-Forgiving, 
the Most Merciful." 

Then, when they entered unto Joseph, he betook his parents to himself and said: "Enter Egypt, if 
Allah will, in security." 

And he raised his parents to the throne and they fell down before him prostrate. And he said: "O 
my father! This is the interpretation of my dream of old! My Lord has made it come true! He was 
indeed good to me, when He took me out ofprison, and brought you all here out of the Bedouin 
life, after Satan had sown enmity between me and my brothers. Certainly, my Lord is the Most 
Courteous and Kind unto whom He will. Truly He! Only He is the All Knowing, the All-Wise." 
(Ch 12:98-100) 

Epilogue 

Consider his feelings now that his dream has come true. He prays to Allah: 

"My Lord! You have indeed bestowed on me of the sovereignty, and taught me the interpretation 
of my dreams; The only Creator of the heavens and the earth! You are my Wall (Protector, 
Helper, Supporter, Guardian etc), in this world and in the Hereafter, cause me to die as a 
Muslim (the one submitting to Your Will), and join me with the righteous." (Ch 12:101) 

Joseph arranged an audience with the king for himself and his family, to ask the king's permission 
for them to settle in Egypt. Joseph was an assert to the kingdom, and the king was happy to have 
him remain with his household. Joseph prostrated to Allah in gratitude. 

The Death of Jacob and Joseph (PBUT) 

Before he died, Jacob (pbuh) advised his children to adhere to the teachings of Islam, the religion 



of all of Allah's prophets. Allah the Almighty revealed; 

"Or were you witnesses when death approached Jacob? When he said unto his sons: "What will 
you worship afterme?" they said: "We shall worship your Ilah (God-Allah) the Ilah (God) of 
your father. Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, One Ilah (God), and to Him we submit in Islam." (Ch 
12:133 Quran). 

Joseph (pbuh), at the moment of his death, asked his brothers to bury him beside his forefathers if 
they were to leave Egypt. So when Joseph (pbuh) passed away, he was mummified and placed in 
a coflBn until such a time as he could be taken out of Egypt and buried beside his forefathers, as he 
had requested. It was said that he died at the age of one hundred ten. 


www.islambasics.com 




With Aflsh's Che Me/cjftj/ B^ntfictof, thi fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Job (Ayoub) 


Job’s Family History 


Ibn Ishaaq stated that he was a man of Rum. His name was Job, Ibn Mose, Ibn Razeh, Ibn Esau, 
Ibn Isaac (pbuh), Ibn Abraham (pbuh). Someone else said he was Job, Ibn Mose, Ibn Rimil, Ibn 
Esau, Ibn Isaac, Ibn Jacob. There have also been other statements on his lineage. Ibn Asaker 
narrated that his mother was a daughter of Eot (pbuh). It was said, also that his father was one 
who believed in Abraham (pbuh) when he was cast into the fire. 

The first opinion is the most plausible, because he was a descendant of Abraham's offspring as 
Allah Almighty declared; 

"That was Our proof which We gave Abraham against his people. We raise whom We will in 
degrees. Certainly your Lord is All-Wise, All Knowing. And We bestowed upon him Isaac and 
Jacob, each of them We guided and before him. We guided Noah, and among his progeny David, 
Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. Thus do We reward the good doers. (Ch 6:83-84) 

Allah's Praises of Job 

Allah the Almighty praised His worshipper Job in His Glorious Quran: 

"Truly I We found him patient. How excellent a slavel Verily, he was ever oft returning in 
repentance to Us I" (Ch 38:44) 

Job (pbuh) was repentant, remembering Allah with thankfulness, patience, and steadfastness. This 
was the cause of his rescue and the secret of Allah's praising him. 

A group of angels were discussing Allah's other human creatures, how those who were humble 
earned Allah's pleasure, while those who were arrogant incurred His displeasure. One of the 
angels remarked; "The best creature on earth today is Job, a man of noble character who displays 
great patience and always remembers his Generous Eord. He is an excellent model for the 
worshippers of Allah. In return, his Lord has blessed him with a long life and plenty of servants, as 
well as the needy and the poor share in his good fortune; he feeds and clothes the poor and buys 
slaves to set them free. He makes those who receive his charity feel as if they are favoring him so 
kind and gentle is he." 

Iblis' Jealousy of Job 

Iblis overhearing all of this, became annoyed. He planned to tempt Job to corruption and disbelief. 




so he hastened to him. He tried to distract Job from his prayers by whispering him about the good 
things in life but Job was a tme believer and would not let evil thoughts tempt him. This disturbed 
Iblis even more; thus he began to hate Job even more. 

Iblis Destroys Job’s Wealth 

Iblis complained to Allah about Job. He said that although he was continuously glorifying Allah he 
was not doing so out of his sincerity but to satisfy Allah so that his wealth should not be taken 
away. It was all a show, all out of greed. "If You remove his wealth then You will find that his 
tongue will no longer mention Your name and his praying will stop." 

Allah told Iblis that Job was one of His most sincere devotees. He did not worship Him because 
of the favors; his worship stemmed from his heart and had nothing to do with material things. But 
to prove to Ibhs the depth of Job's sincerity and patience, AUah allowed him to do whatever he 
and his helpers wished with Job's wealth. 

Iblis was very happy, he gathered his helpers and set about destroying Job's cattle, servants and 
farms until he was left with no possessions. Rubbing his hands in glee, Ibhs appeared before Job in 
the guise of a wise old man and said to him: "All your wealth is lost, some people say that it is 
because you gave too much charity and that you are wasting your time with your continuous 
prayers to Allah. Others say that Allah has brought this upon you in order to please your enemies. 
If Allah had the capacity to prevent harm, then He would have protected your wealth." 

True to his belief. Job replied: "What Allah has taken away from me belongs to Him. I was only 
its trustee for awhile. He gives to whom He wills and withholds from whom He wills." With these 
words. Job again prostrated to his Lord. 

Iblis Destroys Job's Cbildren 

When Iblis saw this, he felt frustrated, so he again addressed Allah: "I have stripped Job of all his 
possessions, but he stiU remains grateful to You. However he is only hiding his disappointment, 
for he places great store by his many children. The real test of a parent is through his children. 

You will see how Job will reject You." 

Allah granted Ibhs authority but warned him that it would not reduce Job' faith in His Lord nor 
his patience. 

Iblis again gathered his helpers and set about his evil deeds. He shook the fountain of the house in 
which Job's children were living and sent the building crashing, killing all of them. Then he went 
to Job disguised as a man who had come to sympathize with him. In a comforting tone he said to 
Job: "The circumstances under which your children died were sad. Surely, your Lord is not 
rewarding you properly for all your prayers." Having said this, Iblis waited anxiously hoping Job 
was now ready to reject Allah. 

But again Job disappointed him by replying: "Allah sometimes gives and sometimes takes. He is 
sometimes pleased and sometimes displeased with our deeds. Whether a thing is beneficial or 
harmful to me, I will remain firm in my belief and remain thankful to my Creator." then Job 
prostrated to his Lord. At this Iblis was extremely vexed. 


Iblis Destroys Job's Health 



Iblis called on Allah. "O my Lord, Job's wealth is gone, his ehildren are dead, and he is still healthy 
in body, and as long as he enjoys good health he will continue to worship You in the hope of 
regaining his wealth and producing more children. Grant me authority over his body so that I may 
weaken it. He will surely neglect worshipping You an will thus become disobedient." 

Allah wanted to teach Iblis a lesson that Jo was a devoted servant of his Lord so He granted Iblis 
his 3rd request but placed a condition; "I give you authority over his body but not over his soul, 
intellect or heart, for in these places reside the knowledge of Me and My religion." 

Armed with this new authority, Iblis began to take revenge on Job's body and filled it with disease 
until it was reduced to mere skin and bone and he suffered severe pain. But through all the 
suffering Job remained strong in his faith, patiently bearing all the hardships without complaining. 
Allah's righteous servant did not despair or turn to others for help but remained hopeful of Allah's 
mercy. Even close relatives and friends deserted him. Only his kind, loving wife stayed with him. 

In his hour of need, she showered her kindness on him and cared for him. She remained his sole 
companion and comforter through the many years of suffering. 

Job's Life - Summary 

Ibn Asaker narrated: "Job was a man having much wealth of all kinds; beats, slaves, sheep, vast 
lands of Haran and many children. All those favors were taken from him and he was physically 
afflicted as well. Never a single organ was sound exeept his heart and tongue, with both of whieh 
he glorified Allah, the Almighty all the time day and night. His disease lasted for a long time until 
his visitors felt disgusted with him. His friends kept away from him and people abstained from 
visiting him. No one felt sympathy for him except his wife. She took good care of him, knowing 
his former eharity and pity for her." 

Job's Prayer for Mercy 

Therefore Iblis beeame desperate. He eonsulted his helpers, but they could not advise him. They 
asked : "How is it that your eleverness cannot work against Job, yet you succeeded in misleading 
Adam the father of man, out of Paradise?" 

Iblis went to Job's wife in the form of a man. "Where is your husband?" he asked her. 

She pointed to an almost lifeless form erumbled on the bed and said; "There he is, suspended 
between life and death." 

Iblis reminded her of the days, when Job had good health, wealth and children. Suddenly, the 
painful memory of years of hardship overcame her, and she burst into tears. She said to Job; 

"How long are you going to bear this torture from our Lord? Are we to remain without wealth, 
children or friends forever? Why don't you call upon Allah to remove this suffering?" 

Job sighed, and in a soft voice rephed 

"Iblis must have whispered to you and made you dissatisfied. Tell me how long did I enjoy good 
health and riches?" 


She replied: "eighty years. 



Then Job replied: "How long am I suffering like this?" 

She said: "seven years." 

Job then told her: "In that case I am ashamed to call on my Lord to remove the hardship, for I 
have not suffered longer than the years of good health and plenty. It seems your faith has 
weakened and you are dissatisfied with the fate of Allah. If I ever regain health, I swear I will 
punish you with a hundred strokes! From this day onward, I forbid myself to eat or drink anything 
by your hand. Leave me alone and let my Lord do with me as He pleases." 

Job’s Health is Restored 

Crying bitterly and with a heavy heart, she had no choice but to leave him and seek shelter 
elsewhere. In this helpless sate. Job turned to AUah, not to complain but to seek His mercy: 

"Verily! distress has seized me and You are the Most Merciful of all those who show mercy. " so 
We answered his call, and we removed the distress that was on him, and We restored his family 
to him (that he had lost), and the like thereof along with them as a mercy from Ourselves and a 
Reminder for all who worship Us." (Ch 21:83-84) 

Almighty Allah also instructed: 

"Remember Our slave Job, when he invoked His Lord saying: "Verily! Satan has touched me 
with distress (by losing my health) and torment (by losing my wealth)!" Allah said to him: "Strike 
the ground with your foot: This is a spring of water to wash in and cool and a refreshing drink." 
And We gave him back his family, and along with them the like thereof as a Mercy from Us, and 
a reminder for those who understand." (Ch 38:41-43) 

Job obeyed and almost immediately his good health was restored. Meanwhile, his faithful wife 
could not longer bear to be parted from her husband and returned to him to beg his forgiveness, 
desiring to serve him. On entering her house, she was amazed at the sudden change: Job was 
again healthy! She embraced him and thanked Allah for His mercy. 

Job was not worried, for he had taken an oath to punish her with a hundred strokes if he had 
regained health but he had no desire to hurt her. He kn ew if he did not fulfill the oath, he would 
be guilty of breaking a promise to Allah. Therefore in His wisdom and mercy, Allah came to the 
assistance of His faithful servant and advised him: "take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and 
strike therewith your wife, and break not your oath. 

" Truly! We found him patient. How excellent a slave! Verily, he was ever oft returning in 
repentance to Us!" (Ch 38:44) 

Prophet Muhammad's Account on Job 

Abu Hurairah (may Allah be pleased with him) narrated that the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) said: 


www.islainbasics.CQm 



"While Job was naked, taking a bath, a swarm of gold locusts fell on him, and he started 
collecting them in his garment. His Lord called him: "O Job! Have I not made you too rich to 
need what you see?" He said: "Yes, My Lord! But I cannot shun Your Blessings." (A1 Bukhari) 


www.islambasics.com 





With Afl3h's Nsmi, Che B^ntfictof, thi fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Dhul - Kifl 


Is he a Prophet? 


Allah the Almighty declared; 

" Remember Ishmael and Idris and Dhul Kifl, all were from among those who observe patience." 
(Ch 21:85-86) 

Immediately following Job's story in the Qur'an, Almighty Allah also directed: 

"Remember Our slaves, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (all) owners of strength (in worshipping Us) 
and also of religious understanding. Verily, We did choose them by granting them (a good thing 
) the remembrance of the home (in the Hereafter and they used to make the people remember it 
and also they used to invite the people to obey Allah and to do good deeds for the Hereafter). 
And they are in Our Sight, verily of the chosen and the best! Remember Ishmael, Elisha, and 
Dhul Kifl all are among the best. " (Ch 38:45-48) 

It is obvious from his being mentioned and praised in the Glorious Quran along with those other 
prophets that Dhul - Ki fl was also a prophet. 

However, some of the Quranic commentators assumed that he was not a prophet but that he was 
righteous and strictly just. 

The meaning of Dhul Kifl 

Ibn Jarir narrated that he was not a prophet but he was a righteous man. He supported his people 
to suffice their needs and administered justice among them. That is why he was called Dhul - Ki fl. 
(Dhul - Ki fl literally means "possessor of, or giving, a double requital or portion".) 


www.islainbasics.com 






With Aflah^s Nams, Che B^ntfictof, thi M^rclfui