Prophet Sulaiman (Solomon) 


Solomon’s Knowledge 

Solomon inherited David's prophethood and dominion. This was not a material inheritance, as 
prophets do not bequeath their property. It is given away to the poor and needy, not to their 
relatives. Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) said; "The prophets' property will not be inherited, and 
whatever we leave is to be used for charity." (Sahih Al-Bukhari). 

"And indeed We gave knowledge to David and Solomon, and they both said: "All the praises and 
thanks be to Allah, Who has preferred us above many of His believing slaves!" 

And Solomon inherited (the knowledge of) David. He said: "O mankind! We have been taught 
the language of birds, and on us have been bestowed all things. This, verily, is an evident grace 
(from Allah)." 

And there were gathered before Solomon his hosts of jinns and men, and birds, and they were all 
set in battle order (marchingforwards). (Ch 27:15-17 Quran). 

Solomon Becomes King 

After his father's death, Solomon became king. He begged Allah for a kingdom such as none after 
him would have, and Allah granted his wish. Besides wisdom, Allah had blessed Solomon with 
many abilities. He could command the winds and understand and talk to birds and animals. Allah 
directed him to teach both men and jinns to mine the earth and extract its minerals to make tools 
and weapons. He also favored him with a mine of copper, which was a rare metal in those days. 

Solomon's Admiration of Horses 

During his time horses were the common mode of transportation. They were very essential for 
defense, to carry soldiers and cart provisions and weapons of war. The animals were well cared 
for and well trained. One day Solomon was reviewing a parade of his stable. The fitness, beauty 
and posture of the horses fascinated him so much that he kept on stroking and admiring them. The 
sun was nearly setting, and the time for the middle prayer was passing by. When he realized this, 
he exclaimed; "I surely love the finer things of life than the service of my Lord! Return them to 
me." 


Allah's Gifts to Solomon - Quranic 

Almighty Allah revealed; 

"And to David We gave Solomon. How excellent a slave! Verily, he was ever oft returning in 




repentance (to Us)! 

When there were displayed before him, in the afternoon, well-trained horses of the highest breed 
(for jihad in Allah's cause). And he said: "Alas! I did love the good (these horses) instead of 
remembering my Lord (in my 'Asr prayer) " till the time was over, and the sun had hidden in the 
veil of the night. Then he said: "Bring them (horses) back to me." Then he began to pass his 
hand over their legs and their necks (till the end of the display). 

And indeed We did try Solomon and We placed on his throne Jasadan (a devil, so he lost his 
kingdom for a while) but he did return (to his throne and kingdom by the Grace of Allah and he 
did return) to Allah with obedience and in repentance. He said: "My Lord! Forgive me, and 
bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me. Verily, You are the 
Bestower." 

So, We subjected to him the wind, it blew gently to his order whithersoever he willed, and also 
the devils from the jinns including every kind of builder and diver, and also other bound in 
fetters. (Saying of Allah to Solomon): "This is Our gift, so spend you or withhold, no account 
will be asked. "And verily, he enjoyed a near access to Us, and a good final return Paradise. 
(Ch38:30-40 Quran). 

Solomon Hears the Ant’s Warning 

One day Solomon gathered his army, which had dilferent battalions of men, jinns, birds, and 
animals. He marched them to the country of Askalon. 

While they were passing through a valley, an ant saw the approaching army and cried out to warn 
the other ants: "Run to your homes! Otherwise, unaware, Solomon and his army might crush 
you!" Solomon, hearing the cry of the ant, smiled. He was glad that the ant knew him to be a 
prophet who would not intentionally harm Allah's creation. He thanked Allah for saving the ants' 
lives. 

Solomon Hears the Conversation of Ants - Quranic 

Allah the Almighty narrated: And there were gathered before Solomon his hosts of jinns and men, 
and birds, and they all were set in battle order (marching forwards). Till, when they came to a 
valley of the ants, one of the ants said: "O ants! Enter your dwellings, lest Solomon and his hosts 
crush you, while they perceive not." 

So he (Solomon) smiled, amused at her speech and said: "My Lord! Inspire and bestow upon me 
the power and ability that I maybe grateful for Your Favors which You have bestowed on me and 
on my parents, and that I may do righteous good deeds that will please You, and admit me by 
Your Mercy among Your righteous slaves." (Ch 27:17-19 Quran). 

Solomon's Travels 

In Jerusalem, on a huge rock, Solomon built a beautiful temple to draw the people to worship 
Allah. Today this building is known as "The Dome of the Rock." From there, a large band of 
followers joined Solomon on pilgrimage to the Holy Mosque in Mecca. After they had completed 
their hajj, they traveled to Yemen and arrived in the city of San'a. Solomon was impressed by their 
clever method of channeling water all over their cities. He was keen to build similar water systems 



in his own country but did not have enough springs. 


The Hoopoe Brings Information to Solomon 

He set out to find the hoopoe bird, which could detect water under the ground. He sent signals all 
over the hoopoe to call on him, but it was nowhere to be found. In anger, he declared that unless 
the bird had a good reason for its absence, he would punish it severely. 

The hoopoe eventually eame to Solomon and explained the reason for its delay. "I have 
discovered something of which you are not aware. I have come from Sheba (Sab'a) with 
important news." Solomon became curious, and his anger subsided. The bird continued: "Sab'a is 
ruled by a queen named Bilkis (Bilqis), who has plenty of everything, including a splendid throne. 
But in spite of all this wealth, Satan has entered her heart and the hearts of her people. She rules 
their minds completely. I was shocked to learn that they worship the sun instead of Allah the 
Almighty." 

To check the hoopoe's information, Solomon sent a letter to the queen with the bird. He 
instructed the bird to remain hidden and to watch everything. 

The Queen of Sheba Sends Gifts 

The hoopoe dropped the letter in front of the queen and flew away to hide. She exeitedly opened 
and read it: 

"Verily! It is from Solomon, and verily! It reads: 'In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, and 
Most Merciful; be you not exalted against me, but come to me as Muslims (true believers who 
submit with full submission).( Ch 27:30-31 Quran). 

The queen was very disturbed and hurriedly summoned her advisors. They reacted as to a 
ehallenge, for they felt that there was someone challenging them, hinting at war and defeat, and 
asking them to submit to his conditions. 

They told her that they could only offer advice, but it was her right to command action. She 
sensed that they wanted to meet Solomon's invasion threat with a battle. However, she told them: 
"Peace and friendship are better and wiser; war only brings humiliation, enslaves people and 
destroys the good things. I have decided to send gifts to Solomon, selected from our most 
precious treasure. The courtiers who will deliver the gifts will also have an opportunity to learn 
about Solomon and his military mighty." 

Solomon's Rejects the Queen's Gifts 

Solomon's reconnaissanee team brought him the news of the arrival of Bilkis' messengers with a 
gift. He immediately realized that the queen had sent her men on a probing mission thus, he gave 
orders to rally the army. The envoys of Bilqis, entering amidst the well-equipped army, realized 
that their wealth was nothing in comparison to that of the kingdom of Solomon's palace floors, 
which were made of sandalwood and inlaid with gold. 

They noticed Solomon surveying his army, and they were surprised at the number and variety of 
soldiers, which included lions, tigers, and birds. The messengers stood in amazement, realizing 



that they were in front of an irresistible army. 


The envoys marveled at the splendor surrounding them. They eagerly presented their queen's 
precious gifts and told Solomon that the queen wished that he would accept them as an act of 
friendship. They were shocked by his reaction: he did not even ask to open the covers of the 
containers! He told them: "Allah hagiven me plenty of wealth, a large kingdom, and prophethood. 
I am, therefore, beyond bribery. My only objective is to spread the belief in Tawheed, the Oneness 
of Allah." 

He also directed them to take back the gifts to the queen and to tell her that if she did not stop her 
kind of worship he would uproot her kingdom and drive its people out of the land. 

The Queen Decides to Visit Solomon 

The queen's envoys returned with the gifts and delivered the message. They also told her of the 
wonderful things they had seen. Instead of taking offense, she decided to visit Solomon. 
Accompanied by her royal officials and servants, she left Sheba, sending a messenger ahead to 
inform Solomon that she was on her way to meet him. 

Solomon asked the jinns in his employ whether anyone among them could bring her throne to he 
palace before she arrived. One of them said; "I will bring it to you before this sitting is over." 
Solomon did not react to this ofier; it appeared that he was waiting for a faster means. The jinns 
competed with each other to please him. One of them named Ifrit said: "I will fetch it for you in 
the twinkling of an eye!" 

No sooner had this one - who had the knowledge of the Book - finished his phrase than the throne 
stood before Solomon. The mission had, indeed, been completed in the bhnking of an eye. 
Solomon's seat was in Palestine, and the throne of Bilqis had been in Yemen, two thousand miles 
away. This was a great miracle performed by one of those sitting with Solomon. 

The Queen's Visit with Solomon 

When Bilqis arrived at Solomon's palace, she was welcomed with pomp and ceremony. Then, 
pointing to the altered throne, Solomon asked her whether her throne looked like that one. She 
looked at it again and again. In her mind she was convinced that her throne could not possibly be 
the one she was looking at, as hers was in her palace; et, she detected a striking similarity and 
replied: "It is as if it were the very one, and resembles mine in every respect." Solomon judged 
that she was intelligent and diplomatic. 

He then invited her into the great hall, the floor of which was laid in glass and shimmering. 
Thinking it was water, as she stepped on the floor, she lifted her skirt slightly above her heels, for 
fear of wetting it. Solomon pointed out to her that it was made of solid glass. 

She was amazed. She had never seen such things before. Bilqis realized that she was in the 
company of a very knowledgeable person who was not only a ruler of a great kingdom but a 
messenger of Allah, as well. She repented, gave up sun worship, accepted the faith of AUah, and 
asked her people to do the same. 

It was finished; Bilqis saw her people's creed fall apart before Solomon. She realized that the sun 
which her people worshipped was nothing but one of Allah's creatures. 



The sun eclipsed within her for the first time, and her heart was lit by a never fading light, the light 
of Islam. 

Solomon is Informed About the Queen of Sheba - Quranic 

Almighty Allah told us this story in the Quran: 

" He inspected the birds, and said: "What is the matter that I see not a hoopoe? Or is he among 
the absentees? I will surely punish him with a severe torment, or slaughter him, unless he brings 
me a clear reason." 

But the hoopoe stayed not long, he came up and said: "I have grasped (the knowledge of a thing) 
which you have not grasped and I have come to you from Sheba with true news. I found a woman 
ruling over them, and she has been given all things that could be possessed by any ruler of the 
earth, and she has a great throne. I found her and her people worshipping the sun instead of 
Allah, and Satan has made their deeds fair seeming to them, and has barred them from Allah's 
Way, so they have no guidance." 

Al-La (this word has two interpretations) [As Satan has barred them from Allah's Way} so that 
they do not worship (prostrate before) Allah, or so that they may worship (prostrate before) 
Allah, Who brings light to what is hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you 
conceal and what you reveal. Allah, La ilaha ilia Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but 
He), the Lord of the Supreme Throne! 

(Solomon) said: "We shall see whether you speak the truth or you are one of the liars. Go with 
this letter of mine, and deliver it to them, then draw back from them, and see what answer they 
return." 

She said: "O chiefs! Verily! Here is a delivered to me a noble letter. Verily! It is from Solomon 
and verily! It (reads): 'In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful; Be you not 
exalted against me, but come to me as Muslims (true believers who submit to Allah with full 
submission)." 

She said: "O chiefs! Advise me in this case of mine. I decide no case till you are present with 
me." 

They said: "We have great strength, and great ability for war, but it is for you to command; so 
think over what you will command." 

She said: "Verily! Kings, when they enter a town (country), they despoil it, and make the most 
honorable amongst its people low. And thus they do. But verily! I am going to send him a 
present, and see with what answer the messengers return." 

So when (the messengers with the present) came to Solomon, he said: "Will you help me in 
wealth? What Allah has given me is better than that which He has given you! Nay, you rejoice in 
your gift!" (Then Solomon said to the chief of her messengers who brought the present): "Go 
back to them. We verily shall come to them with hosts that they cannot resist, and we shall drive 
them out from there is disgrace, and they will be abased." 

He said: "O chiefs! Which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me surrendering 
themselves in obedience?" 

An [frit (strong) from the jinns said: "I will bring it to you before you rise from your place 
(council). And verily, I am indeed strong, and trustworthy for such work." 

One with whom was knowledge of the Scripture said: "I will bring it to you within the twinkling 



of an eye!" then when Solomon saw it placed before him, he said: "This is by the Grace of my 
Lord, to test me whether I am grateful or ungrateful! And whoever is grateful, truly, his gratitude 
is for the good of his ownself and whoever is ungrateful, he is ungrateful only for the loss of his 
ownself Certainly! My Lord is Rich (Free of all wants). Bountiful!" 

He said: "Disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will be guided (to recognize 
her throne), or she will be one of those not guided." 

So when she came, it was said to her: "Isyour throne like this?" 

She said: "It is as though it was the very same." 

And Solomon said: "Knowledge was bestowed on us before her, and we were submitted to Allah 
(in Islam as Muslims before her)." 

And that which she used to worship besides Allah has prevented her from Islam, for she was of a 
disbelieving people. 

It was said to her: "Enter As-Sarh" (a glass surface with water underneath it) or a palace, but 
when she saw it, she thought it was a pool, and she tucked up her clothes, uncovering her legs. 
Solomon said: "Verily, it is Sarh paved smooth with slab of glass." 

She said: "My Lord! Verily, I have wronged myself, and I submit (in Islam), together with 
Solomon, to Allah, the Lord of the Alamin (mankind, jinns, and all that exists). " (Ch 27:20-44 
Quran) 

Jinns and Solomon 

Solomon's public work was largely carried out by the jinns. This was a punishment for their sin s 
of making people believe that they were all-powerful, knew the unseen, and could foresee the 
future. As a prophet, it was Solomon's duty to remove such false beliefs from his followers. 

Solomon's Death 

Solomon lived amidst glory, and all creatures were subjected to him. Then Allah the Exalted 
ordained for him to die. His life and death were full of wonders and miracles; thus, his death 
harmonized with his life and glory. His death, like his life, was unique. The people had to learn 
that the future is known neither by the jinns, nor by the prophets, but by Allah alone. Solomon's 
effort in this direction did not end with his life, for even his death became an example. He was 
sitting holding his staff, overseeing the jinns at work in a mine. He died sitting in this position. For 
a long time no one was aware of his death, for he was seen sitting erect. The jinns continued with 
their sand toil, thinking that Solomon was watching over them. 

Many days later, a hungry ant began nibbling Solomon's staff. It continued to do so, eating the 
lower part of the staff, until it fell out of Solomon's hand, and his great body fell to the ground. 
People hurried to him, realizing that he had died a long time ago and that the jinns did not 
perceive the unseen, for had the jinns known the unseen, they would not have kept working, 
thinking that Solomon was alive. 

Solomon's Death - Quranic 


Allah the Exalted revealed: 



"And We caused a fount of molten brass to flow for him, and there were jinns that worked in 
front of him by the Leave of his Lord, and whosoever of them turned aside from Our Command, 
We shall cause him to taste of the torment of the blazing Fire. 

They worked for him what he desired, (making) high rooms, images, basins as large as 
reservoirs, and (making) cauldrons fixed (in their places). "Work you, O family of David, with 
thanks!" But few of My slaves are grateful. 

Then when we decreed death for him (Solomon), nothing informed them (jinns) of his death 
except a little worm of the earth, which kept slowly gnawing away at his stick, so when he fell 
down, the jinns saw clearly that if they had known the unseen, they would not have stayed in the 
humiliating torment. (Ch 34:12-14 Quran). 


www.islainbasics.CQm 




With Afl3h's Nsmi, Che B^ntfictof, thi fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Shia (Isaiah) 


Isaiah and Hezekiah 


Among the prophets between David and Zakariah is Isaiah (pbuh), Ibn Amoz (Amisiah). 

According to Muhammad Ibn Ishaaq, Isaiah (pbuh) appeared before Zakariah (pbuh) and Yahya 
(John the Baptist) (pbuh). He is among those who prophesied about Isa (Jesus) (pbuh) and 
Muhammad (pbuh). The king during his time was called Hezekiah (Hazkia). He listened and was 
obedient to Isaiah in what he advised him to do and prohibit for the good of the state. Affairs took 
momentum among the Israelites. The king became sick with an infected foot. While he was sick, 
King Sennacherib (Sinharib) of Babylon advanced towards Jerusalem with sixty thousand men. 

Allah Grants More Life to Hezekiah 

The people were greatly terrified. The King asked Isaiah: "What did Allah reveal to you regarding 
Sennacherib and his army?" He replied: "He has not yet revealed anything to me." Then the 
revelation came down for King Hezekiah to appoint a successor, as he wished, because his end 
was at hand. When Isaiah told him this, the king turned to the qibla (the direction faced in prayer); 
he prayed, glorified Allah, invoked Him, and wept. Weeping and invoking Allah the All-Powerful 
and majestic with a sincere heart, trust and patience, he said: "O Lord of lords, and God of gods! 
O, Benevolent and Merciful One Whom neither sleep nor nodding can overpower, remember me 
for my deeds and my just judgment over the children of Israel; and all that was from You, and 
You kn ow it better than I do, my open acts and my secrets are with You." 

Allah answered his prayers had compassion on him. He revealed to Isaiah to tell him the glad 
tidings that He had compassion for his weeping and would extend his life for a further fifteen 
years and save him from the enemy, Sennacherib. When Isaiah told this to Hezekiah, his disease 
was healed. Evil and sadness departed, and he fell prostrate, saying: "O Lord, it is You Who 
grants kingship to whomsoever You wish and dethrones whomsoever You wish and elevates 
whomsoever You wish and degrades whomsoever You wish, Knower of the unseen and the 
evident. And lo! You are the First and the Last; the Manifest and the Perceived; You grant mercy 
and answer the prayers of the troubled ones." 

When he raised his head, Allah revealed to Isaiah to command the king to extract the water of the 
fig and apply it to his sore, and he would be whole and cured. He did so and was cured. 

Allah Destroys Hezekiah’s Enemies 

Then Allah sent death upon the army of Sennacherib. In the morning they were aU corpses, except 
Sennacherib and five of his companions, among them Nebuchadnezzar (Bukhtanasar). The king of 
Israel immediately sent for them, put them in shackles and displayed them in the land for seventy 





days to spite and in s ult them. Every day each of them was fed a loaf of barley bread; after seventy 
days he confined them in prison. 

Allah then revealed to Isaiah that the king should send them back to their country so that they 
might warn their people what would happen to them. When they returned, Sennacherib gathered 
his people and told them what had happened to them. The priests and magicians said to him; "We 
told you about their Lord and their prophets, but you did not listen to us. It is a nation which, 
with their God, nobody can overcome." So, Sennacherib was atfaid of Allah. He died seven years later. 

Israel After Hezekiah’s Death 

Ibn Ishaaq also reported that when King Hezekiah of Israel died, the Israelites' condition 
deteriorated; there was political confusion, and their wickedness increased. Isaiah preached to 
them what Allah revealed to him, directing them to righteousness and warning them of Allah's 
severe punishment. His preaching made him their enemy and they decided to kill him, so he 
escaped Ifom them. 

Isaiah's Death 

Ibn Ishaaq also reported an Israelite interpolation which said that when Isaiah was passing by a 
tree, it opened, and he entered therein; but Satan saw him and held onto the loop of his garment 
so that it stuck out. When they saw it, they brought a saw and sawed the tree, and him with it. 

Indeed, Ifom Allah we come and to him we return. 


www.islambasics.com 






With Afl3h's Nsmi, Che B^ntfictof, thi fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Aramaya (Jeremiah) 


Jeremiah’s Family History 

Another prophet is Jeremiah (pbuh) Ibn Hilkiah from the House of Levi Ibn Jaeob (pbuh). It has 
been claimed that he was Al-Khidr. This was related by Al-Dahak from Ibn Abbas but it is not 
true. 

Traditions About Jeremiah 

Ibn Asakir reported that it is written in some scrolls that Jeremiah stood upon the blood of John 
Ibn Zechariah while it was flowing and he said; "O blood! You have enlightened the people, so 
take a rest." So it stopped and condensed until it disappeared. 

There is a tradition that Jeremiah asked Allah: "O Lord! Which of Your slaves is more lovable to 
You?" He answered; "Those who remember Me most away from their remembrance of My 
creatures; those who are not thinking of death, nor speak of eternal living; those who, when they 
are allured by the riches of this world, despise them, and when they lose them are happy; those 
have My love, indeed, and I shall reward them more than they desired." 


Allah’s Warning to the Children of Israel 

Almighty Allah declared; 

“And We gave Moses the Scripture and made it a guidance for the children of Israel (saying): 
"Take not other than me as your Wakil (Protector, Lord, or Disposer of your affairs, etc). O 
offspring of those whom We carried in the ship with Noah! Verily, he was a grateful slave." 

And We decreed for the children of Israel in the Scripture, that indeed you would do mischief of 
the earth twice and you will become tyrants and extremely arrogant! So, when the promise came 
for the first of the two. We sent against you slaves of Yours given to terrible warfare. They 
entered the very innermost parts of your homes. And it was a promise completely fulfilled. Then 
We gave you once again, a return of victory over them. And We helped you with wealth and 
children and made you more numerous in manpower. 

And We said: "If you do good, you do good for yourselves, and if you do evil (you do it) against 
yourselves." 

Then, when the second promise came to pass, (We permitted your enemies) to make your faces 
sorrowful and to enter the mosque (of Jerusalem) as they had entered it before, and to destroy 
with utter destruction that fell in their hands. 

(And We said in the Torah): "It may be that your Lord may show mercy unto you, but if you 
return to sins. We shall return to Our Punishment. And We have made Hell a prison for the 
disbeliveers." (Ch 17:2-8 Quran). 





Allah’s Message to the Children of Israel 


Wahb Ibn Munbab reported that when sin inereased, Allab revealed to an Israelite prophet eaUed 
Amos (Mamia) (pbub) that he should stand before his people and admonish them that they are 
hard-headed, blind, and deaf and tell them: "I (Allah) remember their forefathers, and that makes 
Me mereiful with them. And ask them about My bounty: ean any of them benefit from disobeying 
Me? And does any suffer who obeys Me? The beasts remember their eountries and return to 
them, but those people have forgotten why I have favored them for the sake of their forefathers, 
and have misused their generosity. Your eries have forgotten My tenets and your reeiters worship 
other than Me, and your women have not learned a useful lesson and their rulers have lied against 
me and My messengers. Their hearts and mouths are full of lies. And I swear by My majesty and 
power that I will send upon them people with strange tongues, and strange faees, mereiless in the 
faee of their tears; and I shall send them a tyrannous eruel king, with an army like elouds, and 
followers like storms, and their flags like the wings of eagles, and the paees of their hoses like the 
deeades of a journey. They will return buildings to dust, and leave the villages a wilderness. Woe 
betide it and its inhabitants if they shout and invoke! I will not look at their faees." 

Allah’s Warning to the Children of Israel - Varation 

Ibn Asaker has related the same in these words: Ishaaq Ibn Bishr said that Idris told them that 
Wahb Ibn Munbab said that Allah the Exalted sent Jeremiah to the ehildren of Israel when the 
situation had beeome worse among them - in disobedienee, killing of prophets and eovetousness. 
Allah was determined to revenge Himself upon them vindietively; and so He revealed to Jeremiah: 
"I am going to destroy Jerusalem (the ehildren of Israel) irevenge. Go to the Dome of the Roek. I 
will give you My eommands and revelations." Jeremiah stood up and rent his elothes, and applied 
ashes to his faee and fell prostrate and said: "O Lord! Would that my mother had not borne me, 
when You made me the last prophet of Israel, and Jerusalem be destroyed in my time." Allah said: 
"Raise your head." He raised his head, wept, and said: "O my Lord! Whom will You set against 
them?" He said: "The worshippers of fire who do not fear My punishment, nor expeet My reward. 
Stand up Jeremiah, and hear the news about Israel. Before I ehose you, I had made you and 
favored you and honored you. Go with the king and guide and proteet him." 

(He was with the king while he was reeeiving revelation from Allah, and they forgot how Allah 
saved them.) "Go and tell them what I have told you." "O Allah! I am weak and if You do not 
strengthen me." "Do you not know that all affairs are eontrolled by Me? I am Allah without 
semblanee, or any like Me. I spoke to the oeeans so; I am with you, and nothing shall harm you. 

Go to your people and tell them: Allah has remembered you, with His remembranee of our 
forefathers' good deeds. The animals remember their eountries and return to them. But those 
people of yours are drenehed in destruetion and damnation, for they have forgotten the purpose of 
My generosity to their forefathers and have misplaeed My favors. The seholars and priests have 
gone astray and have worshipped another god besides Me. "As for their kings and prinees, they 
have been lavished with My bounty and though themselves safe from My fate. They abandon My 
Book and kill My prophets. Is it possible for Me to have a partner? Is it possible for Me to make a 
ereature to be worshipped and to be obeyed besides Me? As for their reeiters and jurists, they 
teaeh and learn what they like. As for the ehildren of the prophets, they are oppressed and 



seduced and go with the crowd. They want the positions of their fathers without the discipline, 
patience, piety, and kindness of their fathers. 


"By my power, I swear, that I shall send woe upon them that no wise man can understand. I shall 
replace their luxury with ordeal, chains, and fetters and after dwelling in palaces, they will dwell in 
dust. I will disgrace and degrade their womenfolk. I create My creatures and slaves with mercy 
and bounty. If they accept and recognize it, I complete My favors and mercy. When I change My 
mind, I change My mind; and if I change, I am angry; and if I am angry, I punish, and nothing 
prospers with My anger." 

Jeremiah Pleads on Behalf of His People 

According to Ka'b, Jeremiah said: "By your grace I have come to learn before You; how is it 
possible when I am weak and powerless, to speak before You? But by Your mercy You have 
spared me to this day. None fears this punishment more than I do, because I have been among 
them while they disobeyed You, yet without it changing me. If You punish me, I deserve it, and if 
You spare me, I expect it of Your kindness. O Lord, You are Overlord! Are you going to destroy 
their country when it is the place of Your prophets the place of Your revelations? O Lord the 
Exalted and Blessed by Your Name! For You to destroy this mosque and all pertaining to it, and 
those houses which landed Your praise! O Lord, for You to kill these people and punish them, 
when they are the issue of Abraham Your faithful friend and David Your chosen one! O lord, 
which village will escape Your punishment then? Which worshipper will escape Your vengeance 
after the children of Your faithful friend Abraham?" 

He on High said: "He who disobeys Me will not detest My punishment. I had honored them 
because they obeyed Me. If they disobeyed me I will place them among the disobedient, until I 
rescue them out of My Mercy." 

Jeremiah said: "O Lord, You made friends with Abraham and for his sake You preserved us; and 
Moses You did save; and he asked You to save us and not abandon us, nor throw us to the 
enemy." And so Allah revealed to him: "O Jeremiah, I made you honored in your mother's womb 
and have chosen you to this day. If your people had protected the orphans, the widows, the 
helpless, and the stranded, I would have been their Sustainer. They would have been like a blissful 
garden to Me; but I complain of the children of Israel to you. I have been the kind shepherd to 
them; but I honor only those who honor and despise those who despise My command. Those 
before them feared Me, but these people displayed their obedience of Me in the temple, market 
place, hill and mountain tops, and under the shade of trees until the heavens wondered at them 
before Me, and the earth and the mountains, including the beasts, wondered and wailed. All that 
had no effect on them; nor was the Book useful to them." 

Jeremiah's People Refuse to Listen 

Ka'b said that when Jeremiah delivered the message of his Lord, and the people heard the threats 
and warnings in it, they said: "You are lying, if you are saying that Allah shall destroy the land. 

His temple. His Book, His worship, and monotheism." They captured Jeremiah, tied him up and 
imprisoned him. At this, Allah sent Nabuchadnezzar upon them. He entered the country with his 



troops and surrounded the eity. When the siege was prolonged they surrendered to his rule. They 
opened the gates and Nabuehadnezzar's troops streamed in. 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Rule 

He ruled them savagely and punished them eruelly. He killed a third of them, eaptured a third, and 
spared the lame and the old; then h trampled upon them with the horses, demolished their houses, 
drew the youth along, and stood the women in the market plaees as guards. He intimidated the 
troops and destroyed the eastles and temples. He burned the Torah. He asked about Daniel, the 
prophet who had written to him, but he was dead. His family took out the letter whieh he had 
written to him. Among the family members were Daniel the youngest son of Ezekiel, Azariah, and 
Mishael. He left that letter for them. The younger Daniel sueeeeded the elder Daniel. 
Nabuehadnezzar entered Jerusalem with his troops, then marehed to Syria. He killed the ehildren 
of Israel until he almost exterminated them. He returned to Babylon with booty in the form of 
treasure and men, among them young prinees and ehildren of priests numbering seventy thousand. 

Nebuchadnezzar and Jeremiah Meet 

Ibn Ishaaq Ibn Bishr reported that Wahb bin Munbah stated that after Nabuehadnezzar had 
destroyed Jerusalem, he was told that the Israehtes had a man who used to prediet what had 
befallen them, deseribing the king and his aetions, foretelling that he would slay their warriors, 
capture their children, destroy the temple, and burn their Torah. They had said he was lying, and 
so they had tied him and kept him in prison. Nabuehadnezzar ordered that he be brought out from 
prison. Jeremiah was released and the king said to him: "Did you warn those people against what 
has happened to them?" Jeremiah affirmed it and the king said: "I knew that." Jeremiah stated: 
"Allah sent me to them and they accused me of lying." He asked: "Did they beat you and imprison 
you?" He replied: "Yes." The king said: "What a wicked race, to deny their prophet and their 
Lord's message! So would you like to join me, for me to honor you and make you free? And if 
you want to remain in your country, I grant you that." Jeremiah replied: "I am still in the security 
of Allah when I did not go away from the country at all. If the Israelites did not go out of it, they 
would not fear you, nor any other, nor would you have authority over them." When 
Nabuehadnezzar heard this, he let him alone, and so Jeremiah went to live in his place in Elia 
(Elat). 

Nebuchadnezzar and Jeremiah Meet - Variation 

According to Hisham Ibn al-Kalbi, Nabuehadnezzar marched on Jerusalem, its king who was a 
descendant of David, who had built Jerusalem for the Israelites - made peace with him. 
Nabuehadnezzar took hostages and departed. When he had gone as far as Thahria, he learned that 
the Israelites had risen against their king and killed him because he had made peace with him. So, 
Nabuehadnezzar beheaded all the hostages that were with him. He returned to the Israelites and 
invaded the city, killing the warriors and capturing their families. 

When he had found Jeremiah in prison and released him, Jeremiah told him hi s story and his 
warnings concerning him . Nabuehadnezzar said: "What a wicked people, that disobey the prophet 
of Allah!" He set him free and honored him. Jeremiah gathered around him the remaining weak 



souls of Israel. 


The Children of Israel Do Not Repent 

He said to them: "Woe to us! We have disobeyed Allah. We must repent to AUah, Great and 
Majestic, for what we have done, and I shall pray to Allah to accept our repentance." He prayed 
so, and Allah revealed to him that He would not accept it: "If they are sincere, they must stay with 
you in this country (or town)." He told them what Allah had revealed. They said: "How can we 
stay in this town when it has been devastated and Allah is angry with its people?" So they refused 
to stay. 

Ibn al-Kalbi said that since that time, the children of Israel were dispersed the world over. Some 
of them went to the Hijaz, Taif and Medina, and others settled in Wadi al Qura. Some went to 
Egypt, and Nabuchadnezzar wrote to its king, demanding those who had escaped thither, but he 
refused. So Nabuchadnezzar mounted his army and fought him. He defeated him and captured 
their children. Then he marched to the extreme of Morocco. He returned from Morocco, Egypt, 
Jerusalem, Palestine, and Jordan with many captives, and among them was Daniel. 

Ibn al-Kalbi said that it appears that it was Daniel, the youngest son of Ezekiel, and not the elder 
Daniel, according to Ibn Munbah. Allah knows best. 

Jeremiah Sleeps for 100 Years, Jerusalem is Rebuilt 

Hashim ibn Al-Kalbi reported that Allah the Exalted revealed to Jeremiah: "I am going to 
reconstruct Jerusalem, so go there." He went and found it devastated. He said to himself: 

"Exalted be Allah! Allah told me to come to this city and that He was reconstructing it. When will 
Allah rebuild it? And when will He bring it back to life?" 

Then he slept, and his donkey with him, for seventy years until Nebuchadnezzar and the king over 
him - Eaharasab, who had ruled one hundred twenty years - had perished. Eaharasab was 
succeeded by his son Bashtaasib (According to the Bible, Ezra 1, this would be King Cyrus of 
Persia). News of the death of Nebuchadnezzar had reached Bashtaasib through Sham (Syria), 
which was in utter ruin, the wM beats had multiplied in Palestine, for it had become empty of 
men. Bashtaasib therefore called to the children of Israel in Babylon: "Whoever wants to return to 
Sham (Syria/Palestine) may do so." It was ruled by one from the House of David, who was 
ordered by Bashtaasib to rebuild Jerusalem and its temple, so they returned and rebuilt it. Then 
Jeremiah opened his eyes, blinked from the seventy year sleep, and saw how the city was being 
reconstructed. He remained in that sleep of his until he had completed one hundred years. When 
Allah awoke him, he thought that he had slept no more than an hour. He had known the city as a 
devastated land; when he saw it rebuilt and populated, he said: 

"He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and he, to whom wisdom is granted, is indeed granted 
abundant good. But none remember (will receive admonition) except men of understanding." [2:269] 

The History of Israel After its Rebuilding 

Ibn Al-Kalbi said that the Israelites settled it, and Allah rebuilt their glory. It remained so until 



Rome vanquished them in the era of the tribal kings; then they lost their community and their 
authority after the appearance of Christianity. 

This is how Ibn Jarir tells their story in his History of Jerusalem. He said that Laharasab was a just 
king and diplomatic. The people, cheifs, and kings obeyed him, and he was gifted in the 
construction of cities, canals and institutions. When he grew too weak to rule, after more than one 
hundred, his son Bashtaasib ascended to the throne. During his reign the religion of 
Zoroastrianism (aUVIajusia) appeared. A man named (Zoroaster) (Zordahst) had been a companion 
of Jeremiah and had angered him, so Jeremiah cursed him. Zoroaster became a leper. He went to 
the land of Azerbaijan, joined Bashtaasib forced peolple to embrace it and killed many people who 
disobeyed him. 

After Bashtaasib, his son Barman ruled. They were among the famous and heroic kings of Persia, 
and Nebuchadnezzar had been deputy to all three of them. He hved a long time, may Allah 
torment him! 

The essence of what has been written by Ibn Jarir is that the person or wayfarer passing through 
thi s village was Jeremia. Others say that it was Hosea (Ozir), and this is the consensus of the 
ancients and those after them, but Allah kn ows best. 


www.islambasics.com 





With Afl3h's Nsmi, Che B^ntfictof, thi fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Daniel 


Allah Saves Daniel from the Lions 

Ibn Abi Al-Dunya narrated the following, based on a chain of citations. Nabuchadnezzar captured 
the two lions and threw them into a pit. He then brought Daniel and threw him at them; yet they 
did not pounce at him; rather, he remained as Allah wished. When then he desired food and drink, 
Allah revealed to Jeremiah, who was in Sham (Palestine/Syria): "Prepare food and drink for 
Daniel." He said; "O Lord I am in Jerusalem while Daniel is in Babylon (Iraq)." Allah revealed to 
him; "Do what I have commanded you to do, and I shall send you one who will carry you and 
what you have prepared." Jeremiah did so and Allah sent him something that would carry him 
until he arrived at the brink of the pit. 

Then Daniel asked; "Who is this?" He answered; "I am Jeremiah." He asked; "What brought 
you?" He answered; "Your Lord sent me to you." He said; "And so my Lord has remembered 
me?" He said; "Yes." Daniel said; "Praise be to Allah Who never forgets those who appeal to 
Him! And Praise be to Him Who compensates good with good, rewards patience with safety, 
dispels harm after distress, assures us when we are overwhelmed, and is our hope when skill fails us." 

Daniel After Death 

Yunus Ibn Bakeer reported that Muhammad Ibn Ishaaq reported that Abu Khalid Ibn Dinar 
reported that Abul Aa'lia said; "When Tastar was invaded, we found, in the treasure house of 
Al-Harmazan, a bed on which lay a dead man, with a holy script at his bedside. We took the 
scripture to Umar Ibn A1 Khattab. He called Ka-b and he translated it into Arabic, and I was the 
first Arab to read it. I read it as I read the Qur'an." Here, I (Khalid Ibn Dinar) said to Abul Aa'lia; 
"What was in it?" He said; "Life history, annals, songs, speech, and what is to come." I asked; 

"And what did you do with the man?" He said; "We dug in the river bank thirteen separate graves. 

At nightfall we buried him and leveled all the graves in order to mislead people for they would 
tamper with him." I asked; "And what did they want from him?" He said; "When the sky was 
cloudless for them, they went out with his bed, and it rained." I asked; "Who did you think the 
man was?" He said; "A man called Daniel." I asked; "And for how long had he been dead when 
you found him?" He said; "Three hundred years." I asked; "Did not anything change on him?" He 
said; "No, except for the hairs of his face (beard, and mustache); the skin of the prophets is not 
harmed by the earth, nor devoured by hyenas." 

The chain of citation from Abul Aa'lia is good, but if the date of the dead man's death was really 
three hundred years, then he was not a prophet but a saintly an, because there was no prophet 
between Isa (Jesus)(pbuh), and the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh), according to the hadith in 
Bukhari. The span between them (the dead man and Muhammad (pbuh)) was variously reported 
as four hundred, six hundred, and six hundred twenty years. It could be that he had died eight 





hundred years earlier, which would be near to Daniel's time, if his being Daniel is correct. 
However, he could still have been somebody else, either a prophet or a saint. Yet the truth is 
more likely he was Daniel, because he had been taken by the King of Persia and remained 
imprisoned as already mentioned. 

It was narrated with a correct citation that his nose as one span (nine inches) long. Anas Ibn 
Malik, with a good citation, said that his nose was an arm's stretch long (two feet), on which basis 
he is thought to be an ancient prophet from before this period. Almighty Allah knows best. 

Daniel's Death - Hadith 

Ibn Abu Dunya reported from Abu Bilal that Abu Musa found with Daniel a holy script and a 
container in which were dirhams, his ring and ointment. He wrote to Umar, who replied: "Send 
the scripture to us, send some of the ointment, tell the Muslims who are with you to use it, share 
the dirhams among them, and leave the ring for you. 

Abu Bakr Ibn Abu Dunya related without citation that when Abu Musa was told that he was 
Daniel, he stayed with him, embraced him, and kissed him. Then he wrote to Umar that he found 
with him nearly ten thousand Dhirhams. It used to be that people came to borrow from it, and if 
they did not return it, they became sick. Umar ordered his burial in a grave to be kept secret and 
the money to be sent to the treasury, with the box and the ring a gift to him (Abu Musa). 

It is related of Abu Musa that he told four of the captives to dam the river and dig a grave in the 
middle, where he buried him. Then he beheaded the four captives in order for the secret to be kept 
from all except himself 

Daniel's Ring 

Ibn Abu Dunya also reported, by a chain of citations, that a ring was seen on the hand of Ibn Abu 
Barda Ibn Abu Musa. The gem was carved with two lions with a man between them, whom they 
were licking. Abu Barda said: "This is the ring of that man whom the people of this town say is 
Daniel. Abu Musa took it the day he was brrried. The learned people of the town told Abu Musa 
that soothsayers and astrologers told the king in Daniel's time that a boy would be born who 
would destroy him and his kingdom. So the king swore to kill all the baby boys, except that they 
threw Daniel in the lions' den, and the lion and lioness began to lick him and did not harm him. His 
mother came and took him. Abu Musa said: "And so Daniel carved his image and the image of the 
two lions into the gem of his ring, for him not to forget Allah's blessing upon him in this.'" This 
has a good citation. 


www.islambasics.com 




With Aflsh's Che Me/cjftj/ B^ntfictof, Hn fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Uzair (Ezra) 


Ezra Sleeps For 100 Years 

Ishaaq Ibn Bishr reported, on the authority of Ibn' Abbas and others, that Ezra was a saint and a 
wise man. He went out one day to his own farm, as was his custom. About noon he came to a 
deserted, ruined place and felt the heat. He entered the ruined town and dismounted his donkey, 
taking figs and grapes in his basket. He went under the shade of the khaiba tree and ate his food. 
Then he got up to look at what remained of the ruins. The people had long been lost, and he saw 
bones. 

"Oh! How will Allah ever bring it to life after its death?" (Ch 2:259 Quran) 

He said this not out of doubt but out of curiosity. Allah sent the Angel of Death to take his life. 

He remained dead for one hundred years. 

After one hundred years had passed and there had been changes in Israelite affairs, Allah sent an 
angel upon Ezra to revive his heart and his eyes in order for him to feel and see how Allah revives 
the dead. The angel said: "For how long did you sleep?" He said: "A day or part of a day." He 
said this because he kn ew he had slept early in the afternoon and woke up late in the afternoon. 
The angel said: "You remained asleep for one hundred years." He ate and drank the food which 
he had prepared before he was overtaken by that long sleep. Then the angel revived his donkey. 

Almighty Allah said: 

"And look at your donkey! Thus We have made of you a sign for the people. Look at the bones, 
how We bring them together and clothe them with flesh." When this was clearly shown to him he 
said: "I know now that Allah is able to do all things." (Ch 2:259) 

Ezra Returns Home 

He rode on his donkey and entered his native place, but the people did not recognize him, nor did 
his household, except the maid, now an old woman. He asked her: "Is this the house of Ezra?" 

She said: "Yes, but the people have long forgotten Ezra." He said: "I am Ezra, Allah had taken 
my life for a one hundred years and has now returned it to me." She said: "Ezra used to be 
answered when he prayed to Allah. Pray to cure me of blindness if you are Ezra." He prayed for 
her and massaged her eyes and took her by the hand. "Get up by the power of Allah," he said. The 
crippled woman stood up and walked; she opened her eyes and saw; her blindness was gone. She 
said: "I bear witness that you are Ezra." 


www.islambasics.com 





Ezra Finds and Copies the Torah 

She rushed to the assembly of the Israelites. Ezra's son was one hundred eighteen years old, and 
his children's children now were lords of the assembly. She called out to them saying: "This is 
Ezra come to you." They accused her of lying. She said: "I am your old maid. He has just prayed 
to Allah for me, and here I am whole again, walking and seeing." The people stood up and looked 
at him. His son said: "My father had a mark between his shoulders, a black mole," and they 
discovered it. They said: "None among us memorized the Torah since Nabuchadnezzar burned it, 
except Ezra; and there was only one copy of the Torah, which was hidden by Sarukha. He buried 
it in the days of Nabuchadnezzar in a place none but Ezra knows." Ezra led the people to the 
hidden place and took out that copy of the Torah. Its leaves had rotted, and the book itself 
crumpled. 

Ezra sat under the shade of a tree surrounded by the children of Israel and copied out the Torah 
for them from that script. Henceforth, the Jews said that Ezra is the son of Allah, for two 
evidences which came down from Heaven and for his copying the torah and for his fighting the 
cause of the Israelites.He had been copying the Torah for Ezekial in the land of dar kn ess in the 
hermitage of Ezekiel. The village which was in ruins is said to be Sayrabadh. 

Ibn Abbas commanded: "So it is as Allah said: 

"We have made of you a sign for the people." (Ch 2:259) 

That is, for the Israelites, in that he was sitting among his children, the old men, and he a youth. 
He died as a forty year old, and Allah resurrected him at the same age on the day of his death." 


www.islambasics.CQm 




With Aflsh's Che Me/cjftj/ B^ntfictof, ihi fi^rclfuf