Prophet Yahya (John) 


John’s Childhood 

John (pbuh) was born a stranger to the world of children who used to amuse themselves, as he 
was serious all the time. Most children took delight in torturing animals whereas, he was merciful 
to them. He fed the animals from his food until there was nothing left for him, and he just ate fruit 
or leaves of trees. John loved reading since childhood. When he grew up, Allah the Exalted called 
upon him; 

"O John! Holdfast to the Scripture (The Torah). "And We gave him wisdom while yet a child. 

(Ch 19:12 Quran). 

John’s Qualities 

Allah guided him to read the Book of Jurisprudence closely; thus, he became the wisest and most 
knowledgeable man of that time. Therefore, Allah the Almighty endowed him with the faculties of 
passing judgments on people's affairs, interpreting the secrets of religion, guiding people to the 
right path, and warning them against the wrong one. 

John reached maturity. His compassion for his parents, as well as for all people and all creatures, 
increased greatly. He called people to repent their sins. 

There are quite a number of traditions told about John. Ibn Asaker related that one time his 
parents were looking for him and found him at the Jordan River. When they met him, they wept 
sorely, seeing his great devotion to Allah, Great and Majestic. 

Ibn Wahb said that, according to Malik, grass was the food of John Ibn Zakariyah, and he wept 
sorely in fear of Allah. A chain of narrators reported that Idris AI Khawlawi said; "Shall I not tell 
you he who had the best food? It is John Ibn Zakariyah, who joined the beasts at dinner, fearing to 
mix with men." 

Why John Always Wept 

Ibn Mubarak stated that Wahb Ibn Al-Ward narrated that Zakariayah did not see his son for three 
days. He found him weeping inside a grave which he had dug and in which he resided. "My son, I 
have been searching for you, and you are dwelling in this grave weeping!" "O father, did you not 
tell me that between Paradise and Hell is only a span, and it will not be crossed except by tears of 
weepers?" He said to him; "Weep then, my son." Then they wept together. 

Other narrations say that John (pbuh) said; "The dwellers of Paradise are sleepless out of the 
sweetness of Allah's bounty; that is why the faithful must be sleepless because of Allah's love in 
their hearts. How far between the two luxuries, how far between them?" 

They say John wept so much that tears marked his cheeks. 


www.islambasics.com 






John’s Love of Nature 


He found comfort in the open and never cared about food. He ate leaves, herbs, and sometimes 
locusts. He slept anywhere in the mountains or in holes in the ground. He sometimes would find a 
lion or a bear as he entered a cave, but being deeply absorbed in praising Allah, he never heeded 
them. The beasts easily recognized John as the prophet who cared for all the creatures, so they 
would leave the cave, bowing their heads. 

John sometimes fed those beasts, out of mercy, Ifom his food and was satisfied with prayers as 
food for his soul. He would spend the night crying and praising Allah for His blessings. 

When John called people to worship Allah, he made them cry out of love and submission, 
arresting their hearts with the truthfulness of his words. 

A conflict took place between John and the authorities at that time. A tyrant king, Herod Antipas, 
the ruler of Palestine, was in love with Salome, his brother's daughter. He was planning to marry 
his beautiful niece. The marriage was encouraged by her mother and by some of the learned men 
of Zion, either out of fear or to gain favor with the ruler. 

On hearing the ruler's plan, John pronounced that such a marriage would be incestuous. He would 
not approve it under any circumstance, as it was against the Law of the Torah. 

John's Cruel Death 

John's pronouncement spread like wildfire. Salome was angry, for it was her ambition to rule the 
kingdom with her uncle. She plotted to achieve her aim. Dressing attractively, she sang and 
danced before her uncle. Her arousing Herod's lust. Embracing her, he offered to fulfill whatever 
she desired. At once she told him: "I would love to have the head of John, because he has defiled 
your honor and mine throughout the land. If you grant me this wish, I shall be very happy and will 
offer myself to you." Bewitched by her charm, he submitted to her monstrous request. John was 
executed and his head was brought to Salome. The cruel woman gloated with delight. But the 
death of Allah's beloved prophet was avenged. Not only she, but all the children of Israel were 
severely punished by invading armies which destroyed their kingdom. 


www.islainbasics.CQm 




With Aflsh's Che Me/cjftj/ B^ntfictof, ihi fi^rclfuf 


Prophet Isa 


Allah Declares He Has No Son 

In many verses of the Glorious Qur'an Allah the Exalted denied the claim of the Christians that He 
has a son. 

A delegation from Nagran came to the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh). They began to talk about 
their claim about the Trinity, which is that Allah is three in one, the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, with some disagreement among their sects. That is why Allah affirmed in many verses of 
the Qur'an that Jesus is a slave of Allah, whom He molded in the womb of his mother like any 
other of His creatures, and that He created him without a father, as He created Adam without a 
father or a mother. Almighty Allah had chosen Isa to be one of his messengers to humanity. 

The Birth of Mary - Quranic 

Allah the Almighty said; 

"Allah chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham and the family of Imran above the Alamin 
(mankind and jinns)(of their times). Offspring, one of theo other, and Allah is All-Hearer, 
All-Knower. 

Remember when the wife of Imran said: "O my Lord! I have vowed to You what (the child that) is 
in my womb to be dedicated for Your services (free from all worldly work; to serve Your Place of 
worship), so accept this, from me. Verily, You are the All-Hearer, the All Knowing." 

Then when she delivered her (child Mary), she said: "O my Lord! I have delivered a female 
child," and Allah knew better what she delivered, - "and the male is not like the female, and I 
have named her Mary, and I seek refuge with You (Allah) for her and for her offspring from 
Satan, the outcast." 

Mary's Sustenance - Quranic 

So her Lord (Allah) accepted her with goodly acceptance. He made her grow in a good manner 
and put her under the care of Zechariah. Every time he entered Al-Mihrab (a praying place or a 
private room), he found her supplied with sustenance. 

As Allah recounted in the Glorious Quran: 

She said: "From Allah. Verily, Allah provides sustenance to whom He wills, without limit. " (Ch 
3:37 Quran) 


Mary's Family History 




Allah declared that He had elected Adam (pbuh) and the elite of his offspring who obey Allah. 
Then He specified the family of Abraham (pbuh), which includes the sons of Ishmael (pbuh), and 
the family of Imran, the father of Mary. 

Muhammad Ibn Ishaaq stated that he was Imran Ibn Bashim, Ibn Amun, Ibn Misha, Ibn Hosqia, 
Ibn Ahriq, Ibn Mutham, Ibn Azazia, Ibn Amisa, Ibn Yamish, Ibn Ahrihu, Ibn Yazem, Ibn 
Yahfashat, Ibn Eisha, Ibn lyam, Ibn Rahba am, Ibn David (Dawud). 

Mary’s Birth - Longer Version 

Prophet Zakariyah's (pbuh) wife's sister had a daughter named Hannah. She was married to Imran, 
a leader of the Israelites. For many years, the couple remained childless. Whenever Hannah saw 
another woman with a child, her longing for a baby increased. Although years had passed, she 
never lost hope. She believed that one day Allah would bless her with a child, on whom she would 
shower all her motherly love. 

She turned to the Lord of the heavens and the earth and pleaded with Him for a child. She would 
offer the child in the service of Allah's house, in the temple of Jerusalem. Allah granted her 
request. When she learned that she was pregnant, she was the happiest woman alive, and thanked 
AUah for His gift. Her overjoyed husband Imran also thanked Allah for His mercy. 

However, while she was pregnant her husband passed away. Hannah wept bitterly. Alas, Imran 
did not live to see their child for whom they had so longed. She gave birth to a girl, and again 
turned to Allah in prayer; 

"O my Lord, I have delivered a female child, " and the male is not like the female, and I have 
named her Mary, and I seek refuge with You (Allah) for her and her offspring from Satan, the 
outcast. " (Ch 3:36 Quran) 

Zechariah Becomes Mary’s Guardian 

Hannah had a big problem in reference to her promise to Allah, for females were not accepted 
into the temple, and she was very worried. Her sister's husband Zakariyah, comforted her, saying 
that Allah knew best what she had delivered and appreciated fully what she had offered in His 
service. She wrapped the baby in a shawl and handed it over to the temple elders. As the baby was 
a girl, the question of her guardianship posed a problem for the elders. This was a child of their 
late and beloved leader, and everyone was eager to take care of her. Zakariyah said to the elders: 
"I am the husband of her maternal aunt and her nearest relation in the temple; therefore, I will be 
more mindful of her than all of you." 

As it was their custom to draw lots to solve disagreements, they followed this course. Each one 
was given a reed to throw into the river. They had agreed that whoever's reed remained afloat 
would be granted guardianship of the girl. All the reeds sank to the bottom except Zakariyah's. 
With this sign, they all surrendered to the will of Allah and made him the guardian. 


www.islambasics.com 



Mary’s High Status 


To ensure that no one had access to Mary, Zakariyah built a separate room for her in the temple. 
As she grew up, she spent her time in devotion to Allah. Zakariyah visited her daily to see to her 
needs, and so it continued for many years. One day, he was surprised to find Ifesh fiuit, which 
was out of season in her room. As he was the only person who could enter her room, he asked her 
how the Ifuit got there. She replied that these provisions were Ifom Allah, as He gives to whom 
He wills. Zakariyah understood by this that Allah had raised Mary's status above that of other 
women. 

Thereafter, Zakariyah spent more time with her, teaching and guiding her. Mary grew to be a 
devotee of Allah, glorifying Him day and night. 

Mary's High Status - Prophet Muhammad 

Ali Ibn Abi Talib narrated that the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) said; "The best of the world's 
women is Mary (in her lifetime), and the best of the world's women is Khadija (in her hfetime)." 
(Sahih Al-Bukhari) 

Abu Musa Al-Ashari also narrated that the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) said: "May among men 
attained perfection but among women none attained perfection except Mary the daughter of 
Imran, and Asiya the wife of Pharaoh, and the superiority of Aisha to other women is like the 
superiority of Tharid (an Arabic dish) to other meals." 

Mary Receives News of Jesus 

While Mary was praying in her temple, an angel in the form of a man appeared before her. Filled 
with terror, she tried to flee, praying: 

"Verily! I seek refuge with the Most Beneficent (Allah) from you, if you do fear Allah." 

The angel said: "I am only a Messenger from your Lord, (to announce) to you the gift of a 
righteous son." 

She said: "How can I have a son, when no man has touched me, nor am I unchaste? " 

He said: "So (it will be), your Lord said: "That is easy for me (Allah): And (We wish) to appoint 
him as a sign to mankind and a mercy from Us (Allah), and it is a matter (already) decreed, (by 
Allah).(Ch 19:18-21 Quran) 

The Birth of Jesus 

The angel's visit caused Mary great anxiety, which increased as the months went by. How could 
she face giving birth to a child without having a husband? Later, she felt life kicking inside her. 
With a heavy heart, she left the temple and went to Nazareth, the city in which she had been born 
where she settled in a simple farm house to avoid the public. 

But fear and anxiety did not leave her. She was Ifom a noble and pious family. Her father had not 
been an evil man nor was her mother an impure woman. How could she prevent tongues Ifom 
wagging about her honor? 



After some months, she eould not bear the mental strain any longer. Burdened with a heavy 
womb, she left Nazareth, not knowing where to go to be away from this depressing atmosphere. 
She had not gone far, when she was overtaken by the pains of ehildbirth. She saw down against a 
dry pahn tree, and here she gave birth to a son. Looking at her beautiful baby, she was hurt that 
she had brought him into the world without a father. She exelaimed: "I wish I had died before this 
happened and had vanished into nothingness!" 

Suddenly, she heard a voiee nearby: "Grieve not, your Lord has plaeed a rivulet below, and shake 
the trunk of this tree, from whieh ripe dates will fall. So eat and drink and regain the strength you 
have lost; and be of good eheer, for what you see is the power of Allah, Who made the dry pahn 
tree regain life, in order to provide food for you." For a while she was eomforted by Allah's 
miraele, for it was a sure sign of her innoeenee and purity. 

Mary Returns to the City with Jesus 

Mary deeided to return to the eity. However, her fears also returned. What was she going to tell 
the people? As if sharinhis mother's worry, the baby began to speak: "If you meet any person say: 
'I have vowed to fast for The Benefrcent and may not speak to any human today.'" With this 
miraele, Mary felt at ease. 

As she had expeeted, her arrival in the eity with a newborn baby in her arms aroused the euriosity 
of the people. They seolded her: "This is a terrible sin that you have eommitted." She put her 
finger to her lips and pointed to the ehild. They asked: "How ean we speak to a newborn baby?" 
To their total amazement, the child began to speak clearly: "I am Allah's servant. Allah has given 
me the Book, and has made me a prophet, and has blessed me wherever I may be, and has 
enjoined on me prayers and ahns-giving as long as I live. Allah has made me dutiful towards she 
who had home me. He has not made me arrogant nor unblessed. Peace unto me the day I was 
born, the day I die, and the day I shall be raised alive." 

Most of the people realized that the baby was unique, for it Allah wills something. He merely says 
"Be" and it happens. Of course, there were some who regarded the baby's speech as a strange 
trick, but at least Mary could now stay in Nazareth without being harassed. 

Mary Receives News of Jesus - Quranic 

Allah the Exalted revealed: 

"And mention in the Book (the Qur'an, O Muhammad, the story of) Mary, when she withdrew in 
seclusion from her family to a place facing east. She placed a screen (to screen herself from 
them; then We sent to her Our Ruh (angel Gabriel), and he appeared before her in the form of a 
man in all respects. 

She said: "Verily! I seek refuge with the Most Beneficent (Allah) from you, if you do fear Allah." 
The angel said: "I am only a Messenger from your Lord, (to announce) to you the gift of a 
righteous son." 

She said: "How can I have a son, when no man has touched me, nor am I unchaste? " 



He said: "So (it will be), your Lord said: "That is easy for Me (Allah): and (We wish) to appoint 
him as a sign to mankind and a mercy from Us (Allah), and it is a matter (already) decreed, (by 
Allah).'" (Ch. 19: 16-21) 

The Birth of Jesus - Quranic 

So she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a far place (Bethlehem valley, about four to 
six miles from Jerusalem). And the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She 
said: "Would that 1 had died before this, and had been forgotten and out of sight!" 

Then (the babe "Jesus" or Gabriel) cried unto her from below her, saying: "Grieve not! Your 
Lord has provided you a water stream under you; and shake the trunk of palm tree towards you, 
it will let fall fresh ripe dates upon you. So eat and drink and be glad, and if you see any human 
being, say: 'Verily! 1 have vowed a fast unto the Most Beneficent (Allah) so 1 shall not speak to 
any human being this day.'" (Ch. 19: 22-26) 

Mary and Jesus Return to the City - Quranic 

"Then she brought him (the baby) to her people, carrying him. They said: "O Mary! Indeed you 
have brought a thing Fariyya (an unheard mighty thing). O sister (the like) of Aaron (not the 
brother of Moses, but he was another pious man at the time of Mary)! Your father was not a man 
who used to commit adultery, nor was your mother an unchaste woman." 

Then she pointed to him. They said: "How can we talk to one who is a child in the cradle?" 

He (Jesus) said: "Verily! 1 am a slave of Allah. He has given me the Scripture and made me a 
Prophet; and He has made me blessed wheresoever 1 be, and has enjoined me prayer, and Zakat, 
as long as 1 live, and dutiful to my mother, and made me not arrogant, unblest. And Salam 
(peace) be upon me the day 1 was born, and the day 1 die, and the day I shall be raised alive!" 

(Ch. 19:27 - 33) 

Allah's Message About Jesus - Quranic 

Such is Jesus, son of Mary. (It is) a statement of truth, about which they doubt (or dispute). It 
befits not (the Majesty of) Allah that He should beget a son (this refers to the slander of 
Christians against Allah, by saying that Jesus is the son of Allah). Glorified (and Exalted be He 
above all that they associate with Him). When He decrees a thing. He only says to it, "Be!" - and 
it is. 

Jesus said: "And verily Allah is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him (Alone). That is the 
Straight Path. (Allah's Religion of Islamic Monotheism which He did ordain for all of His 
Prophets)." 

Then the sects differed (the Christians about Jesus), so woe unto the disbeliveers (those who gave 
false witness saying that Jesus is the son of Allah) from the meeting of a great Day (the Day of 
Resurrection, when they will be thrown in the blazing Fire). 

How clearly will they (polytheists and disbeliveers in the Oneness of Allah) see and hear, the 
Day when they will appear before Us! But the Zalimun (polytheists and wrong-doers) today are 
in plain error. And warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day of grief and regrets, when the case has 
been decided, while now they are in a state of carelessness and they believe not. (Ch 19:34-39 Quran) 



Some Stories About Mary's Pregnancy 


It was said that Joseph the Carpenter was greatly surprised when he knew the story, so he asked 
Mary: "Can a tree eome to grow without a seed?" She said: "Yes, the one whieh Allah ereated for 
the first time." He asked her again: "Is it possible to bear a ehild without a male partner?" She 
said: "Yes, Allah, ereated Adam without male or female!" 

It was also said that, while pregnant, Mary went one day to her aunt, who reported that she felt as 
if she was pregnant. Mary in turn, said that she, too, was feeling as if she was pregnant. Then her 
aunt said: "I ean see what is in my womb prostrating to what is in your womb." 

Jesus Upsets the Jews 

The Jewish priests felt this ehild Jesus was dangerous, for they felt that the people would turn 
their worship to AUah the Almighty Alone, displaeing the existing Jewish tenets. Consequently, 
they would lose their authority over the people. Therefore, they kept the miraele of Jesus's speeeh 
in infaney as a seeret and aeeused Mary of a great misdeed. 

Jesus's Ability to Debate 

As Jesus (pbuh) grew, the signs of prophethood began to inerease. He eould tell his Ifiends what 
kind of supper waited for them at home and what they had hidden and where. When he was 
twelve years old, he aeeompanied his mother to Jerusalem. There he wandered into the temple 
and joined a erowd listening to the leeture of the Rabbis (Jewish priests). The audienee were all 
adults, but he was not afraid to sit with them. After listening intently, he asked questions and 
expressed his opinion. The learned rabbis were disturbed by the boy's boldness and puzzled by the 
questions he asked, for they were unable to answer him. They tried to silenee him, but he ignored 
their attempts and eontinued to express his views. Jesus beeame so involved in this exehange that 
he forgot he as expeeted baek home. 

In the meantime, his mother went home, thinking that he might have gone baek with relatives or 
friends. When she arrived, she diseovered that he was not there, so she returned to the eity to 
look for him . At last she found him in the temple, sitting among the learned, eonversing with 
them. He appeared to be quite at east, as if he had been doing this all his life. Mary got angry with 
him for causing her worry. He tried to assure her that all the arguing and debating with the 
learned had made him forgot the time. 

Jesus Does Not Observe tbe Sabbatb 

Jesus grew up to manhood. It was Sabbath, a day of complete rest: no fire could be lit or 
extinguished nor could females plait their hair. Moses (pbuh) had commanded that Saturday be 
dedicated to the worship of Allah. However, the wisdom behind the Sabbath and its spirit had 
gone, and only the letter remained in the Jews' hearts. Also, they thought that Sabbath was kept in 
heaven, and that the People of Israel had been chosen by Allah only to observe the Sabbath. 

They made a hundred things unlawful on Saturday even self-defense or calling a doctor to save a 
patient who was in bad condition. This is how their life was branded by such hypocrisy. Although 



the Pharisees were guardians of the law, they were ready to sell it when their interests were 
involved so as to obtain personal gains. There was, for example, a rule which prohibited a journey 
of more than one thousand yards on the Sabbath day. What do we expect of the Pharisees in this 
case? The day before, they transferred their food and drink from their homes two thousand yards 
away and erected a temporary house so that from tthey could travel a further thousand yards on 
the Sabbath day. 

Jesus was on his way to the temple. Although it was the Sabbath, he reached out his hand to pick 
two pieces of fruit to feed a hungry child. This was considered to be a violation of the Sabbath 
law. He made a fire for the old women to keep themselves warm from the freezing air. Another 
violation. He went to the temple and looked around. There were twenty thousand Jewish priests 
registered there who earned their living from the temple. The rooms of he temple were full of them. 

Jesus Receives His Prophethood 

Jesus observed that the visitors were much fewer than the priests. Yet the temple was full of 
sheep and doves which were sold to the people to be offered as sacrifices. Every step in the 
temple cost the visitor money. They worshipped nothing but money. In the temple, the Pharisees 
and Sadducees acted as if it were a market place, and these two groups always disagreed on 
everything. Jesus followed the scene with his eyes and observed that the poor people who could 
not afford the price of the sheep or dove were swept away like flies by the Pharisees and 
Saducees. Jesus was astonished. Why did the priests bum a lot of offerings inside the temple, 
while thousands of poor people were hungry outside it? 

On this blessed night, the two noble prophets John (pbuh) and Zakariyah (pbuh) died, killed by 
the mhng authority. On the same night, the revelation descended upon Jesus (pbuh). Allah the 
Exalted commanded him to begin his call to the children of Israel. To Jesus, the life of ease was 
closed, and the page of worship and stmggled was opened. 

Jesus’s Message 

Tike an opposing force, the message of Jesus came to denounce the practices of the Pharisees and 
to reinforce the Eaw of Moses. In the face of a materialistic age of luxury and worship of gold, 
Jesus called his people to a nobler life by word and deed. This exemplary life was the only way 
out of the wretchedness and diseases of his age. Jesus's call, from the beginning, was marked by 
its complete uprightness and piety. It appealed to the soul, the inner being, and not be a closed 
system of rules laid down by society. 

Jesus continued inviting the people to Almighty Allah. His call was based on the principle that 
there is no mediation between the Creator and His creatures. However, Jesus was in conflict with 
the Jews' superficial interpretation of the Torah. He said that he did not come to abrogate the 
Torah, but to complete it by going to the spirit of its substance to arrive at its essence. 

He made the Jews understand that the Ten Commandments have more value than they imagined. 
Eor instance, the fifth commandment does not only prohibit physical killing, but all forms of 
killing; physical, psychological, or spiritual. And the sixth commandment does not prohibit 



adultery only in the sense of unlawful physical contact between a man and a woman, but also 
prohibits all forms of unlawful relations or acts that might lead to adultery. The eye commits 
adultery when it looks at anything with passion. 

Jesus Denounces Materialism 

Jesus was therefore in confrontation with the materialistic people. He told them to desist from 
hypocrisy, show and false praise. There was no need to hoard wealth in this life. They should not 
preoccupy themselves with the goods of this passing world; rather they must preoccupy 
themselves with the afiairs of the coming world because it would be everlasting. 

Jesus told them that caring for this world is a sin, not fit for pious worshippers. The disbeliveers 
care for it because they do not know a better way. As for the believers, they know that their 
sustenance is with Allah, so they trust in Him and scorn this world. 

Jesus continued to invite people to worship the Only Lord, Who is without partner, just as he 
invited them to purify the heart and soul. 

Jewish Priests Try to Embarrass Jesus 

His teaching annoyed the priests, for every word of Jesus was a threat to them and their position, 
exposing their misdeeds. 

The Roman occupiers had, at first, no intention of being involved in this religious discord of the 
Jews because it was an internal affair, and they saw that this dispute would distract the Jews from 
the question of the occupation. 

However, the priests started to plot against Jesus. They wanted to embarrass him and to prove 
that he had come to destroy the Mosaic Law. The Mosaic Law provides that an adulteress be 
stoned to death. They brought him a Jewish adulteress and asked Jesus: "Does not the law 
stipulate the stoning of the adulteress?" Jesus answered: "Yes." They said: "This woman is an 
adulteress." Jesus looked at the woman and then at the priests. He knew that they were more 
sinful than she. They agreed that she should be killed according to Mosaic Law, and they 
understood that if he was going to apply Mosaic Law, he would be destroying his own rules of 
forgiveness and mercy. 

Jesus understood their plan. He smiled and assented: "Whoever among you is sinless can stone 
her." His voice rose in the middle of the Temple, making a new law on adultery, for the sinless to 
judge sin. There was none eligible; no mortal can judge sin, only Allah the Most Merciful. 

As Jesus left the temple, the woman followed him. She took out a bottle of perfume from her 
garments, knelt before his feet and washed them with perfume and tears, and then dried his feet 
with her hair. Jesus turned to the woman and told her to stand up, adding: "O Lord, forgive her 
sins." He let the priests understand that those who call people to Almighty Allah are not 
executioners. His call was based on mercy for the people, the aim of all divine calls. 

Jesus’ Brings the Dead to Life 


Jesus continued to pray to Allah for mercy on his people and to teach his people to have mercy on 



one another and to believe in Allah. 

Jesus continued his mission, aided by divine miracles. Some Qur'anic commentators said that 
Jesus brought four people back from the dead: a friend of his named Al-Azam, an old woman's 
son, and a woman's only daughter. These three had died during his lifetime. When the Jews saw 
thi s they said: "You only resurrect those who have died recently; perhaps they only fainted." They 
asked him to bring back to life Sam the Ibn Noah. 

When he asked them to show him his grave, the people accompanied him there. Jesus invoked 
Allah the Exalted to bring him back to life and behold, Sam the Ibn Noah came out from the grave 
gray-haired. Jesus asked: "how did you get gray hair, when there was no aging in your time?" He 
answered: "O Spirit of Allah, I thought that the Day of Resurrection had come; from the fear of 
that day my hair turned gray." 

The Miracles of Jesus - Quranic 

Allah the Almighty said: 

"Remember when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): "O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember 
My Favor to you and to your mother when I supported you with Ruh-ul-Qudus (Gabriel) so that 
you spoke to the people in the cradle and in maturity; and when I taught you writing, AI Flikmah 
(the power of understanding), the Torah and the Gospel; and when you made out of the clay, as 
it were, the figure of a bird, by My Permission, and you breathed into it, and it became a bird by 
My Permission, and you healed those born blind, and the lepers by My Permission, and when 
you brought forth the dead by My Permission; and when I restrained the Children of Israel from 
you (when they resolved to kill you) since you came unto them with clear proofs, and the 
disbeliveers among them said: 'This is nothing but evident magic. 

And when I (Allah) put in their hearts of the disciples (of Jesus) to believe in Me and My 
Messenger, they said: "We believe. And bear witness that we are Muslims." (Ch 5:110-111 Quran) 

Jesus' Abilities and the Disciples - Quranic 

Almighty Allah also revealed: 

"And He Allah will teach him (Jesus) the Book and Al Hikmah (the Sunna, the faultless speech of 
the Prophets, wisdom, etc.), (and) the Torah and the Gospel. 

And will make him (Jesus) a Messenger to the Children of Israel (saying): "I have come to you 
with a sign from your Lord, that I design for you out of clay, as it were, the figure of a bird, and 
breathe into it, and it becomes a bird by Allah's Leave; and I heal him who was born blind, and 
the leper, and I bring the dead to life by Allah's leave. And I inform you of what you eat, and 
what you store in your houses. Surely, therein is a sign for you, if you believe. And I have come 
confirming that which was before me of the Torah, and to make layful to you part of what was 
forbidden to you, and I have come to you with prooffrom your Lord. So fear Allah and obey me. 
Truly! Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him (Alone). This is the Straight Path." 

Then when Jesus came to know of their disbelief, he said: "Who will be my helpers in Allah's 
Cause?" The disciples said: "We are the helpers of Allah; we believe in Allah, and bear witness 



that we are Muslims (we submit to Allah)." 

Our Lord! We believe in what You have sent down, and we follow the Messenger (Jesus); so 
write us down among those who bear witness (to the truth, La ilaha ill Allah - none has the right 
to be worshipped but Allah). 

And they (disbeliveers) plotted (to kill Jesus), and Allah planned too. And Allah is the Best of the 
planners. (Ch 3:48-54 Quran) 

Allah Sends the Disciples a Feast 

Jesus continued calling people to Almighty Allah and laying down for them what might be called 
"the law of the Spirit." Once when standing on a mountain surrounded by his disciples, Jesus saw 
that those who believed in him were from among the poor, the wretched, an the downtrodden, 
and their number was small. Some of the miracles which Jesus performed had been requested by 
his disciples, such as their wish for a "holy table" to be sent down from heaven. 

Allah the Exalted said: 

"Remember when the disciples said: "O Jesus, son of Mary! Can your Lord send down to us a 
table spread (with food) from heaven?" Jesus said: "Fear Allah, if you are indeed believers." 
They said: "We wish to eat thereof and to be stronger in Faith and to know that you have indeed 
told us the truth and that we ourselves be its witnesses." 

Jesus, son of Mary, said: "O Allah, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread (with food) 
that there may be for us - for the first and the last of us - a festival and a sign from You; and 
provide us sustenance, for You are the best of sustainers. "Allah said: "I am going to send it 
down unto you, but if any of you after that disbelieves, then I will punish him with a torment such 
as I have not inflicted on anyone among all the Alamin (mankind and jinn). 

And (remember) when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): "O 'lesa (Jesus), son of 
Maryam (Mary)! Did you say unto men: 'Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah?' 

" He will say: "Glory be to You! It was not for me to say what I had no right (to say). Had I said 
such a thing. You would surely have known it. You know what is in my inner—self though I do 
not know what is in Yours, truly. You, only You, are the All—Knower of all that is hidden and 
unseen." (Ch 5:112-116 Quran) 

It was related that Jesus commanded his disciples to fast for thirty days; at the end of it, they 
asked Jesus to bring food from heaven to break their fast. Jesus prayed to Allah after his disciples 
had doubted Allah's power. The great table cam down between two clouds, one above and one 
below, while the people watched. Jesus said: "O Lord, make it a mercy and not a cause of 
distress." So it fell between Jesus's hands, covered with a napkin. 

Jesus suddenly prostrated and his disciples with him. They sensed a fragrance, which they had 
never smelled before. Jesus said: "The one who is the most devout and most righteous may 
uncover the table, that we might eat of it to thank Allah for it." They said: "O Spirit of Allah, you 
are the most deserving." 

Jesus stood up, then performed ablution and prayed before uncovering the table, and behold, there 
was a roasted fish. The disciples said: "O Spirit of Allah, is this the food of this world or of 



Paradise?" Jesus said to his disciples; "Did not Allah forbid you to ask questions? It is the divine 
power of Allah the Almighty Who said; 'Be,' and it was. It is a sign from Almighty Allah warning 
of great punishment for unbelieving mortals of the world. This is the kernel of the matter." 

It is said that thousands of people partook of it, and yet they never exhausted it. A further miracle 
was that the blind and lepers were cured. 

Those Worshipping Jesus and Allah's Questions to Jesus 

The Day of the Table became one of the holy days for the disciples and followers of Jesus. Later 
on, the disciples and followers forgot the real essence of the miracles, and so they worshipped 
Jesus as a god. 

Almighty Allah asserted; 

"And remember when Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection): "O Jesus, son of Mary! Did 
you say unto men: 'Worship me and my mother as two gods besides Allah?'"He will say: "Glory 
be to You! It was not for me to say what I had no right to say. Had I said such a thing, You would 
surely have known it. You know what is in my inner self though I do not know what is in Yours, 
truly. You, only You, are the All Knower of all that is hidden and unseen. Never did I say to them 
aught except what You (Allah) did command me to say: 'Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord', 
And I was a witness over them while I dwelt amongst them, but when You took me up. You were 
the Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things. (This is a great admonition and 
warning to the Christians of the whole world). If you punish them, they are Your slaves, and if 
You forgive them. Verily You, only You are the All Mighty, the All Wise." 

Allah will say: "This is a Day on which the truthful will profit from their truth: theirs are 
Gardens under which rivers flow (in Paradise) - they shall abide therein forever. Allah is pleased 
with them and they with Him. That is the great success (Paradise). To Allah belongs the 
dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is therein, and He is Able to do all things." 
(Ch 5:116-120 Quran) 

The Jews Plot to Kill Jesus 

Jesus went on his mission until vice knew that its throne was threatening to fall. So the forces of 
evil accused him of magic, infringement of the Mosaic Law, allegiance with the devil; and when 
they saw that the poor people followed him, they began to scheme against him. 

The Sanhedrin, the highest judicial and ecclesiastical council of the Jews, began to meet to plot 
against Jesus. The plan took a new turn. When the Jews failed to stop Jesus' s call, they decided to 
kill him. The chief priests held secret meetings to agree on the best way of getting rid of Jesus. 
While they were in such a meeting, one of the twelve apostles of Jesus, Judas Iscariot, went to 
them and asked; "What will you give me if I deliver him to you?" Judas bargained with them until 
they agreed to give him thirty pieces of silver kn own as shekels. The plot was laid for the capture 
and murder of Jesus. 

It was said that the high priest of the Jews tore his garment at the meeting, claiming that Jesus had 
denied Judaism. The tearing of clothes at that time was a sign of disgust. 


www.islainbasics.CQm 



The Torture of Jesus 


The priests had no authority to pass the death sentence at that time, so they convinced the Roman 
governor that Jesus was plotting against the security of the Roman Empire and urged him to take 
immediate action against him. The governor ordered thaJesus be arrested. 

According to the Book of Matthew, Jesus was arrested and the council of the high priests passed 
the death sentence upon him. Then, they began insulting him, spitting on his face and kicking him. 
It was the Roman custom for the condemned to be flogged before they were executed. So Pilate, 
the Roman governor, ordered that Jesus be flogged. The Mosaic Law stipulates forty lashes, but 
the Roman had no limit, and they were brutal lashes. After that, Jesus was handed to the soldiers 
for crucifixion. They took off his clothes, and kept them. They put a crown of thorns on his head 
to mock him . According to custom he carried his cross on his back to increase his suffering. 

Jesus's Crucifixion - Bible Version 

Finally, they reached a place called Golgotha, meaning the Place of Skulls, outside the walls of 
Jerusalem. Instead of giving him a cup of wine diluted with scent to help lessen the pain on the 
cross, the soldiers gave Jesus a cup of vinegar diluted with gall. Then they crucified him and, as a 
further mockery, two thieves with him. So it is written in the Bible. 

Jesus's Crucifixion - Quranic 

But the faith of Islam came with views quite different from that of the extend gospels with regards 
to both the end of Jesus and his nature. 

The Glorious Qur'an affirms that Allah the Exalted did not permit the people of Israel to kill Jesus 
or crucify him. What happened was that Allah saved him Ifom his enemies and raised him to 
heaven. They never killed Jesus, they killed someone else. 

Allah the Almighty declared; 

"And because of their saying (in boast), "We killed Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger 
of Allah, " but they killed him not, nor crucified him, but the resemblance of Jesus was put over 
another man (and they killed that man) and those who differ therein are full of doubts. They 
have no certain knowledge, they follow nothing but conjecture. For surely; they killed him not 
(Jesus, son of Mary): But Allah raised him (Jesus) up (with his body and soul) unto FBmself (and 
he is in the heavens). And Allah is Ever All Powerful, All Wise. 

And there is none of the people of the Scripture (Jews & Christians), but must believe in him 
(Jesus, son of Mary, as only a Messenger of Allah, and a human beingO, before his (Jesus or a 
Jew's or a Christian's ) death (at the time of the appearance of the angel of death). And on the 
Day of Resurrection, he (Jesus) will be a witness against them. ( Ch 4:157-159 Quran) 

Almighty Allah also revealed: 

"And remember when Allah said: "O Jesus! 1 will take you and raise you to Myself and clear you 
(of the forged statement that Jesus is Allah's son) of those who disbelieve, and 1 will make those 
who follow you (Monotheists, who worship none but Allah ) superior to those who disbelieve (in 



the Oneness of Allah, or disbelieve in some of His Messengers, e.g. Muhammad, Jesus, Moses, 
etc., or in His Holy Books, e.g. the Torah, the Gospel, the Qur'an) till the Day of Resurrection. 
Then you will return to Me and I will judge between you in the matters in which you used to 
dispute." (Ch 3:55 Quran). 

Refutation of the Christians Claim 

Allah Disclaims Begetting Anyone - Surah 19, Almighty Allah refuted the elaims of the Jews and 
the Christians in many verses of the Glorious Qur'an. 

And they say: "The Most Beneficent (Allah) has begotten a son (or offspring or children) (as the 
Jews say: Ezra is the son of Allah, and the Christians say that He has begotten a son (Christ), 
and the pagan Arabs say that he has begotten daughters (angels, etc.))." 

Indeed you have brought forth (said) a terrible evil thing. Whereby the heavens are almost torn, 
and the earth is split asunder, and the mountains fall in ruins, that they ascribe a son (or 
offspring or children) to the Most Beneficent (Allah). 

But it is not suitable for (the Majesty of) the Most Beneficent (Allah) that He should beget a son 
(or offspring or children). There is non in the heavens and the earth but comes unto the Most 
Beneficent (Allah) as a slave. Verily, He knows each one of them, and has counted them a full 
counting. And everyone of them will come to Him alone on the Day of Resurrection (without any 
helper, or protector or defender). (Ch 19:88-95 Quran) 

Allah the Exalted also deelared; 

"Yet, they join the jinns as partners in worship with Allah, though He has created them (the 
jinns), and they attribute falsely without knowledge sons and daughters to Him. Be He Glorified! 
And Exalted above (all) that they attribute to Him. He is the Originator of the heavens and the 
earth. How can He have children when He has no wife? He created all things and He is the 
All-Knower of everything. 

Such is Allah, your Lord! La ilaha ilia Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), the 
Creator of all things. So worship Him (Alone), and He is the Wakil (Trustee. Disposer of affairs. 
Guardian etc.) over all tings. 

No vision can grasp Him, but His Grasp is over all vision. He is the Most Subtle and Courteous, 
Well-Acquainted with all things. (Ch 6:100-103 Quran) 

Almighty Allah commanded: 

"O people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians)! Do not exceed the limits in you religion, nor 
say of Allah aught but the truth. The Messiah Jesus, son of Mary, was (no more than ) a 
Messenger of Allah and His Word, ("Be" - and he was) which He bestowed on Mary and a spirit 
(Ruh) created by Him; so believe in Allah and His Messengers. Say not: "Three (trinity)!" 

Cease! (It is ) better for you. For Allah is the only One Ilah (God), Glory be to Him (Far Exalted 
is He) above having a son. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. 
And Allah is All Sufficient as a Disposer of affairs. 

The Messiah will never be proud to reject to be a slave to Allah, nor the angels who are near (to 
Allah). And whosoever rejects His worship and is proud, then He will gather them all together 
unto Himself. So, as for those who believed (in the Oneness of Allah - Islamic Monotheism) and 
did deeds of righteousness. He will give their (due) rewards, and more out of His Bounty. But as 



for those who refuse His worship and were proud, He will punish them with a painful torment. 
And they will not find for themselves besides Allah any protector or helper. (Ch 4:171-173 
Quran) 

Allah Disclaims Ezra as a Son 

Almighty Allah also declared: 

And the Jews say: Ezra is the son of Allah, and the Christians say: Messiah is the son of Allah. 
That is a saying from their mouths. They imitate the saying of the disbeliveers of old. Allah's 
Curse be on them, how they are deluded away from the truth I 

They (Jews and Christians) took their rabbis and their monks to be their lords besides Allah, (by 
obeying them in things which they made lavrful or unlawful according to their own desires 
without being ordered by Allah) and (they also took as their lord) Messiah, son of Mary, while 
they (Jews and Christians) were commanded (in the Torah and the Gospel) to worship none but 
One Ilah (God- Allah) La ilaha ilia Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). Praise 
and glory be to Him, (far above is He) from having the partners they associate (with Him). (Ch 
9:30-32 Quran) 

Allah Disclaims Begetting Anyone 

Allah the Almighty also revealed: 

"Now ask them (O Muhammad): "Are there (only) daughters for your Lord and sons for them?" 
Or did We create the angels females while they were witnesses? 

Verily, it is of their falsehood that they (Quraish pagans) say: "Allah has begotten offspring or 
children (angels are the daughters of Allah)" And, verily, they are liars I 
Has He (then) chosen daughters rather than sons? What is the matter with you? How do you 
decide? Will you not then remember? Or is there for you a plain authority? Then bring your 
Book if you are truthful! 

And they have invented a kinship between Him and the jinns, but the jinn know well that they 
have indeed to appear (before Him) (i.e. they will be brought for accounts). 

Glorified be Allah! (He is free) from what they attribute unto Him! Except the slaves of Allah, 
whom He chooses (for His Mercy i.e. true believers of Islamic Monotheism who do not attribute 
false things unto Allah). (Ch 37:149-160 Quran) 

And Almighty Allah declared: 

"Surely, in disbelief are they who say that Allah is the Messiah, son of Mary. Say (O 
Muhammad): "Who then has the least power against Allah, if He were destroy the Messiah, son 
of Mary, his mother, and all those who are on the earth together?" And to Allah belongs the 
dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them. He creates what He wills. 
And Allah is Able to do all things. 

And (both) the Jews and Christians say; "We are the children of Allah and His loved ones." Say: 
"Why then does He punish you for your sins ? " Nay, you are but human beings, of those He has 
created. He forgive whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills. And to Allah belongs the 



dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and to Him is the return of 
all. 

O people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians)! Now has come to you Our Messenger 
(Muhammad) making (things) clear unto you, after a break in (the series of) Messengers, lest 
you say: "there came unto us no bringer of glad tidings and no warner." But now has come unto 
you a bringer of glad tidings and a warner. And Allah is Able to do all things. (Ch 5:17-19 
Quran) 

Allah the Exalted warned: Surely they have disbelieved who say: "Allah is the Messiah (Jesus), 
son of Mary." But the Messiah (Jesus) said: "O Children of Israel! Worship AUah, my Lord and 
your Lord." Verily, whosoever sets up partners in worship with Allah, then Allah has forbidden 
Paradise for him, and the Lire wiU be his abode. And for the Zalimun (polytheists, and 
wrong-doers) there are no helpers. 

Surely, disbeliveers are those who said: "Allah is the third of the three (in a Trinity)." But there is 
no llah (god) (none who has the right to be worshipped) but One llah (God- Allah). And if they 
cease not from what they say, verily, a painful torment will befall the disbeliveers among them. 
Will they not repent to Allah and ask His Lorgiveness? Lor Allah is Oft-Lorgiving, Most Merciful. 
The Messiah (Jesus), son of Mary, was no more than a Messenger; many were the Messengers 
that passed away before him. His mother (Mary) was a Siddiqah (she believed in the Words of 
Allah, and His Books. They both used to eat food, as any other human being, while Allah does 
not eat). Look how We made the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) 
clear to them, yet look how they are deluded away from the truth. (Ch 5:72-75 Quran) 

And Almighty Allah ordered: And say: 

"All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has not begotten a son (nor an offspring), and Who 
has no partner in His Dominion, nor He is low to have a Wait (helper, protector, or supporter). 
And magnify Him with all the magnificence, (Allahu-Akbar, Allah is the Most Great). " (Ch 
17:111 Quran) 

The pagans once asked the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh): "To whom is your Lord related. His 
original ancestors and His various branches of descendants?" It is also reported that the Jews said: 
"We worship Ezra, the Son of Allah," and the Christians said: "Jesus is the Son of Allah," and the 
Magians said: "We worship the sun and the moon," an the Pagans said: "We worship idols." 

In response to all of them Allah revealed some of His attributes: Unity, Uniqueness, and other 
substantives: 

Say: (O Muhammad): "He is Allah, the One. Allah As-Samad (The Self- Sufficient Master, 

Whom all creatures need. He neither eats nor drinks). He begets not, nor was He begotten; and 
there is none co-equal or comparable unto Him." (Ch 112:1-4 Quran) 


www.islainbasics.CQm 



With Aflah^s Che khfcitu! B^mfictof, thi M^rclfui 


Prophet Muhammad 


Description of Muhammad 

Muhammad (pbuh) was born in Mecca ( Makkah), Arabia, on Monday, 12 Rabi' Al-Awal (2 
August A.D. 570). His mother, Aminah, was the daughter of Wahb Ibn Abdu Manaf of the 
Zahrah family. His father, 'Abdullah, was the son of Abdul Muttalib. His genealogy has been 
traced to the noble house of Ishmael, the son of Prophet Abraham in about the fortieth descend. 
Muhammad's father died before his birth. 

Before he was six years old his mother died, and the doubly orphaned Muhammad was put under 
the charge of his grandfather Abdul Muttalib who took the most tender care of him. But the old 
chief died two years afterwards. On his deathbed he confided to his son Abu Talib the charge of 
the httle orphan. 

Journey to Busra - Christian Monk merits Muhammad 

When Muhammad was twelve years old, he accompanied his uncle Abu Talib on a mercantile 
journey to Syria, and they proceeded as far as Busra. The journey lasted for some months. It was 
at Busra that the Christian monk Bahira met Muhammad. He is related to have said to Abu Talib: 
'Return with this boy and guard him against the hatred of the Jews, for a great career awaits your 
nephew." 

Muhammad's honest and honorable character 

After this journey, the youth of Muhammad seems to have been passed uneventfully, but all 
authorities agree in ascribing to him such correctness of manners and purity of morals as were 
rare among the people of Mecca. The fair character and the honorable bearing of the unobtrusive 
youth won the approbation of the citizens of Mecca, and b y common consent he received the title 
of "A1 Ameen," The Faithful. 

In his early years, Muhammad was not free from the cares of life. He had to watch the flocks of 
his uncle, who, like the rest of the Bani Hashim, had lost the greater part of his wealth. 

Solitary lifestyle of Muhammad's youth 

From youth to manhood he led an almost solitary life. The lawlessness rife among the Meccans, 
the sudden outbursts of causeless and bloody quarrels among the tribes frequenting the Fair of 
Okadh (The Arabian Olympia), and the immorality and skepticism of the Quraish, naturally caused 
feelings of pity and sorrow in the heart of the sensitive youth. Such scenes of social misery and 
religious degradation were characteristic of a depraved age. 


www.islambasics.com 






Muhammad's marriage to Khadijah 


When Muhammad was twenty five years old, he traveled once more to Syria as a factor of a noble 
and rich Quraishi widow named Khadijah; and, having proved himself faithful in the commercial 
interests of that lady, he was soon rewarded with her hand in marriage. This marriage proved 
fortunate and singularly happy. Khadijah was much the senior of her husband, but in spite of the 
disparity of age between them, the most tender devotion on both sides existed. This marriage gave 
him the loving heart of a woman who was ever ready to console him in his despair and to keep 
alive within him the feeble, flickering flame of hope when no man believed in him and the world 
appeared gloomy in his eyes. 

Troubled, lawless times for the Makkans 

Until he reached thirty years of age, Muhammad was almost a stranger to the outside world. Since 
the death of his grandfather, authority in Mecca was divided among the ten senators who 
constituted the governing body of the Arabian Commonwealth. There was no such accord among 
them as to ensure the safety of individual rights and property. Though family relations afforded 
some degree of protection to citizens, yet strangers were frequently exposed to persecution and 
oppression. In many cases they were robbed, not only of their goods, but even of their wives and 
daughters. At the instigation of the faithful Muhammad, an old league called the Federation of 
Fudul, i.e., favors was revived with the object of repressing lawlessness and defending every weak 
individual - whether Meccan or stranger, free or slave - against any wrong or oppression to which 
he might be the victim within the territories of Mecca. 

When Muhammad reached thirty-five years, he settled by his judgment a grave dispute, which 
threatened to plunge the whole of Arabia into a fresh series of her oft-recurring wars. In 
rebuilding the Sacred House of the Ka'ba in A.D. 605, the question arose as to who should have 
the honor of raising the black stone, the most holy relic of that House, into its proper place. Each 
tribe claimed that honor. The senior citizen advised the disputants to accept for their arbitrator the 
first man to enter from a certain gate. The proposal was agreed upon, and the first man who 
entered the gate was Muhammad "Al-Ameen." His advice satisfied all the contending parties. He 
ordered the stone to be placed on a piece of cloth and each tribe to share the honor of lifting it up 
by taking hold of a part of the cloth. The stone was thus deposited in its place, and the rebuilding 
of the House was completed without further interruption. 

Muhammad thwarts intention of the Romans to control Makka 

It is related that, about this time, a certain Usman, Ibn Huwairith, supported by Byzantine gold, 
made an attempt to convert the territory of Hijaz into a Roman dependency, but the attempt 
failed, chiefly through the instrumentahty of Muhammad. 

Kindness and generousity shown to the people 

These are nearly all the pubhc acts related by historians in which Muhammad took part in the first 
fifteen years of his marriage to Khadijah. As for his private hfe he is described to have been ever 
helpful to the needy and the helpless. His uncle Abu Talib had fallen into distress through his 



endeavors to maintain the old position of his family. Muhammad, being rather rieh at this time by 
his allianee with Khadijah, tried to diseharge part of the debt of gratitude and obligation whieh he 
owed to his unele by undertaking the bringing up and edueation of his son 'Ali. A year later he 
adopted 'Akil, another of his unele's sons. 

Khadijah bore Muhammad three sons and four daughters. All the males died in ehildhood, but in 
loving Ali he found mueh eonsolation. 

About this time, Muhammad set a good example of kindness, whieh ereated a salutary eflfeet upon 
his people. His wife Khadijah had made him a present of young slave named Zaid Ibn Haritha, 
who had been brought as a eaptive to Meeea and sold to Khadijah. When Haritha heard that 
Muhammad possessed Zaid, he came to Mecca and offered a large sum for his ransom. 
Whereupon Muhammd said; "Let Zaid come here, and if he chooses to go with you, take him 
without ransom; but if it be his choice to stay with me, why should I not keep him?' Zaid, being 
brought into Muhammad's presence, declared that he would stay with his master, who treated him 
as if he was his only son. Muhammad no sooner heard this than he took Zaid by the hand and led 
him to the black stone of Ka'ba, where he publicly adopted him as his son, to which the father 
acquiesced and returned home well satisfied. Henceforward Zaid was called the son of 
Muhammad. 

Muhammd was now approaching his fortieth year, and his mind was ever-engaged in profound 
contemplation and reflection. Before him lay his country, bleeding and torn by fratricidal wars and 
intolerable dissension's; his people, sunk in barbarism, addicted to the observation of rites and 
superstitions, were, with all their desert virtues, lawless and cruel. His two visits to Syria had 
opened to him a scene of unutterable moral and social desolation, rival creeds and sects tearing 
each other to pieces, carrying their hatred to the valleys and deserts of Hijaz, and rending the 
townships of Arabia with their quarrels and bitterness. 

Allah's Divine Inspiration touches Muhammad 

For years after his marriage, Muhammad had been accustomed to secluding himself in a cave in 
Mount Hira, a few miles from Mecca. To this cave he used to go for prayer and meditation, 
sometimes alone and sometime with his family. There, he often spent the whole nights in deep 
thought and profound communion with the Unseen yet All-Knowing Allah of the Universe. It was 
during one of those retirements and in the still hours of the night, when no human sympathy was 
near, that an angel came to him to tell him that he was the Messenger of Allah sent to reclaim a 
fallen people to the knowledge and service of their Lord. 

Renowned compilers of authentic traditions of Islam agree on the following account of the first 
revelations received by the Prophet. 

Muhammad would seclude himself in the cave of Mount Hira and worship three days and nights. 
He would, whenever he wished, return to his family at Mecca and then go back again, taking 
wihim the necessities of hfe. Thus he continued to return to Khadijah from time to time until one 
day the revelation came down to him and the Angel Gabriel (Jibreel) appeared to him and said: 

"Read!" 


But as Muhammad was ilhterate, having never received any instruction in reading or writing, he 



said to the angel: 


"I am not a reader." 

The angel took a hold of him and squeezed him as mueh as he could bear, and then said again: 
"Read!" 

Then Prophet said: 

"I am not a reader." 

The Angel again seized the Prophet and squeezed him and said: 

"Read! In the Name of Your Lord, Who has created (all that exists), has created a man from a 
clot (a piece of thick coagulated blood). Read! And your Lord is the Most Generous, Who has 
taught (the writing) by the pen, has taught man that which he knew not." (Ch 96:1-4 Quran). 
Then the Prophet repeated the words with a trembling heart. He returned to Khadijah from Mount 
Hira and said: "Wrap me up! Wrap me up!" She wrapped him in a garment until his fear was 
dispelled. He told Khadijah what had occurred and that he was becoming either a soothsayer or 
one smitten with madness. She replied: "Allah forbid! He will surely not let such a thing happen, 
for you speak the truth, you are faithful in trust, you bear the afflictions of the people, you spend 
in good works what you gain in trade, you are hospitable and you assist your fellow men. Have 
you seen anything terrible?" Muhammad replied: "Yes," and told her what he had seen. 
Whereupon, Khadijah said: "Rejoice, O dear husband and be cheerful. He is Whose hands stands 
Khadijah's life bears witness to the truth of this fact, that you will be the prophet to this people." 

Khadijah consults cousin knowledgeahle of Scriptures; confirmation of Prophet 

After this experience Khadijah went to her cousin Waraqa Ibn Naufal, who was old and blind and 
who knew the Scriptures of the Jews and Christians, and is stated to have translated them into 
Arabic. When she told him of what she had heard, he cried out: "Holy! Holy! Verily, this is the 
Namus (The Holy Spirit) who came to Moses. He will be the prophet of his people. Tell him thi s 
and bid him to be brave at heart." When the two men met subsequently in the street, the blind old 
student of the Jewish and Christian Scriptures spoke of his faith and trust: "I swear by Him in 
Who hand Waraqa's life is, Allah has chosen you to be the prophet of this people. They will call 
you a liar, they will persecute you, they will banish you, and they will fight against you. Oh, that I 
could hve to those days. I would fight for these." And he kissed him on the forehead. 

Muhammad's Visions and struggle to fight depression 

The first vision was followed by a considerable period, during which Muhammad suffered much 
mental depression. Only Almighty Allah knows what Muhammad must have been thinking and 
feeling at that time. He may have been worried about his visions, uncertain as to how the majority 
of the Makkans would treat Allah's blessing, since their own interests were at stake. The 
Makkans, at that time, relied heavily on trade that revolved around polytheistic and pagan rituals 



of false idols and statues and other things that they worshipped. One ean't eontemplate his future 
and responsibilities to the people of the world, as well as the ehaUenges that Allah Almighty had 
chosen him for. 

Prophet rises to start his mission for Allah 

The angel spoke to the grieved heart of hope and trust and of the bright future when he would see 
the people of the earth crowding into the one true faith. His destiny was unfolded to him, when, 
wrapped in profound meditation, melancholy and sad, he felt himself called by a voice from 
heaven to arise and preach. 

"O you (Muhammad) enveloped (in garments)! Arise and warn! And your Lord (Allah) 
magnify!" (Ch 74:1-3 Quran) 

He arose and engaged him self in the work to which he was called. Khadijah was the first to accept 
his mission. She was to believe in the revelations, to abandon the idolatry of her people and to join 
him in purity of heart and in offering up prayers to Allah the Almighty. 

The Companions 

At the beginning of his mission, Muhammad - hereinafter called the Prophet - opened his soul only 
to those who were attached to him and tried to free them from the gross practices of their 
forefathers. After Khadijah, his cousin' Ali was the next companion. The Prophet used often to go 
into the desert around Mecca with his wife and young cousin that they might together offer their 
heart felt thanks to the Lord of all nations for His manifold blessings. Once they were surprised by 
Abu Talib, the father of'Ali. He said to the Prophet: "O son of my brother, what is this religion 
you are following?" "It is the rehgion of Allah of His Angels, of His Messengers and of our 
ancestor Abraham," answered the Prophet. "Allah has sent me to His servants, to direct them 
towards the truth, and you, O my uncle, are the most worthy of all. It is meet that I should thus 
call upon you and it is meet that you should accept the truth and help in spreading it." 

Abu Talib replied: "Son of my brother, I cannot abjure the religion of my fathers; but by the 
Supreme Lord, while I am alive, none shall dare to injure you." Then turning towards 'Ali, the 
venerable chief asked what religion was his. Ah answered: "O father, I believe in Allah and His 
Prophet and go with him." Abu Talib replied: "Well my son, he will not call you to anything 
except what is good, therefore you are free to go with him." 

After 'Ali, Muhammad's adopted son Zaid became a convert to the new faith. He was followed by 
Abu Bakr, a leading member of the Quraish tribe and an honest, wealthy merchant who enjoyed 
great consideration among his compatriots. He was but two years younger than the Prophet. His 
adoption of the new faith was of great moral effect. Soon after, five notables presented 
themselves before the Prophet and accepted Islam. Several converts also came from lower classes 
of the Arabs to adopt the new religion. 

Proliferation of Islamic Knowledge by our Prophet 


For three weary long years, the Prophet labored very quietly to deliver his people from the 
worship of idols. Polytheism was deeply rooted among the people. It offered attractions, which 



the new faith in its purity did not possess. The Quraish had personal material interests in the old 
worship, and their prestige was dependent upon its maintenanee. The Prophet had to eontend with 
the idolatrous worship of its followers and to oppose the ruling ohgarehy, whieh governed its 
destinies. 

After three years of eonstant but quiet struggle, only thirty followers were seeured. An important 
ehange now oeeurred in the relations of the Prophet with the eitizens of Meeea. His eompatriots 
had begun to doubt his sanity, thinking him erazy or possessed by an evil spirit. Hitherto he 
preaehed quietly and unobtrusively. He now deeided to appeal publiely to the Meeeans, 
requesting them to abandon their idolatry. For this he arranged a gathering on a neighboring hill 
and there spoke to them of their folly in the sight of Allah in worshipping pieees of stone whieh 
they ealled their gods. He invited them to abandon their old impious worship and adopt the faith 
of love, truth and purity. He warned them of the fate that had overtaken past raees who had not 
heeded the preaehing of former prophets. But the gathering departed without listening to the 
warning given them by the Prophet. 

Having thus failed to induee his fellow eitizens to listen to him, he turned his attention to the 
strangers arriving in the eity on eommeree or pilgrimage. But the Quraish made attempts to 
fiustrate his efforts. They hastened themselves to meet the strangers first on different routes, to 
warn them against holding any eommunieation with the Prophet, whom they represented as a 
dangerous magieian. When the pilgrims or traders returned to their homes, they earned with them 
the news of the advent of the bold preaeher who was inviting the Arabs loudly - at the risk of his 
own life - to abandon the worship of their dear idols. 

Persecution perpetrated by the Makkan Tribe of Quraish 

Now the Prophet and his followers beeame subjeet to some perseeution and indignity. The hostile 
Quraish prevented the Prophet from offering his prayers at the Saered House of the Ka'ba; they 
pursued him wherever he went; they eovered him and his diseiples with dirt and filth when 
engaged in their devotions; they seattered thorns in the plaees whieh he frequented for devotion 
and meditation. Amidst all these trials the Prophet did not waver. He was full of eonfidenee in his 
mission, even when on several oeeasions he was put in imminent danger of losing his life. 

At this time Hamza, the youngest son of Abdul Muttalib, adopted Islam. Hamza was a man of 
distinguished bravery, an intrepid warrior, generous and true, whose heroism earned for him the 
title of the "Lion of AUah." He beeame a devoted adherent of Islam and everlost his life in the 
eause. 

The Prophet eontinued preaehing to the Arabs in a most gentle and reasonable manner. He ealled 
thepeople, so aeeustomed to iniquity and wrong doings, to abandon their abominations. In 
burning words whieh exeited the hearts of his hearers, he warned them of the punishment whieh 
Allah had infiieted upon the aneient tribes of'Ad and Thamud who had obstinately disobeyed the 
teaehings of Allah's messengers to them. He adjured them by the wonderful sights of nature, by 
the noon day brightness, by the night when it spreads its veil, by the day when it appears in glory 
to listen to his warning before a similar destruetion befell them. He spoke to them of the Day of 
Reekoning, when their deeds in this world will be weighed before the Eternal Judge, when the 
ehildren who had been buried alive will be asked for what erime they were put to death. 

Almighty Allah said: 


'Nay, they wonder that there has come to them a Warner (Muhammad) from among themselves. 



So the disbeliveers say: "This is a strange thing! When we are dead and have become dust (shall 
we be resurrected)? That is a far return." We know that which the earth takes of them (their dead 
bodies), and with Us is a Book preserved (i.e., the Book of Decrees). 

Nay, but, they have denied the truth (this Qur'an) when it has come to them, so they are in a 
confused state (can not differentiate between right and wrong). Have they not looked at the 
heaven above them, how We have made it and adorned it, and there are no rifts in it? And the 
earth! We have spread it out, and set thereon mountains standing firm, and have produced 
therein every kind of lovely growth (plants). 

An insight and a reminder for every slave turning to Allah (i.e., the one who believes in Allah 
and performs deeds of His obedience, and always begs His pardon). And We send down blessed 
water (rain) from the sky, then we produce therewith gardens and grain (every kind of harvests 
that are reaped). And tall date palms, with ranged clusters; a provision for (Allah's) slaves. And 
We give life therewith to a dead land. Thus will be the resurrection (of the dead). Denied before 
them (i.e. these pagans ofMakka who denied you, O Muhammad) the people of Noah, and the 
dwellers of Rass, and the Thamud, and 'Ad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot, and the 
dwellers of the Wood, and the people of Tubba, everyone of them denied their Messengers, so 
My Threat took effect." (Ch 50: 2-14 Quran) 

Almighty Allah also declared: 

"Allpraises and thanks be to Allah Who Alone created the heavens and the earth, and originated 
the darkness and the light, yet those who disbelieve hold others as equal with their Lord. He it is 
Who has created you from clay, and then has decreed a stated term (for you to die). And there is 
with Him another determined term (for you to be resurrected), yet you doubt (in the 
Resurrection). 

And He is Allah (to be worshipped Alone) in the heavens and on the earth. He knows what you 
conceal and what you reveal, and He knows what you earn (good or bad). And never an Ayah 
(sign) comes to them from the Ayat (proofs, evidences, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of their 
Lord, but that they have been turning away from it. 

Indeed, they rejected the truth (The Qur'an and Muhammad) when it came to them, but there will 
come to them the news of that (the torment) which they used to mock at. Have they not seen how 
many a generation before them We have destroyed whom We had established on the earth such 
as We have not established you? And We poured out on them rain from the sky in abundance, 
and made the rivers flow under them. Yet We destroyed them for their sins, and created after 
them other generations." (Ch 6:1-6 Quran) 

As the number of believers increased and the cause of the Prophet was strengthened by the 
conversions of many powerful citizens, the Prophet's preaching alarmed the Quraish. Their power 
and prestige were at stake. They were the custodians of the idols, which the Prophet had 
threatened to destroy; they were the ministers of the worship, which he denounced; in fact their 
existence and hving wholly depended upon the maintenance of the old institutions. The Prophet 
taught that in the sight of his Lord all human were equal, the only distinction recognized among 
them being the weight of their piety. 

Allah the Exalted said: 


"O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into nations and 
tribes, that you may know one another. Verily, the most honorable of you in the Sight of Allah is 



that believer who has At Taqwa (one of the Muttaqun, pious and righteous persons who fear 
Allah much, abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which He has forbidden), and love 
Allah much (perform all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained. Verily! Allah is 
All-Knowing, All-Aware." (Ch 49:13 Quran). 

The Quraish would have none of this leveling of distinctions, as it reflected upon their long 
inherited privileges. Accordingly, they organized a system of persecution in order to suppress the 
movement before it became firmly established. They decided that each family should take upon 
itself the task of stamping out the new faith on the spot. Each household tortured its own 
members or adherents or slaves who were supposed to have connected themselves with the new 
religion. With the exception of the Prophet, who was protected by Abu Talib and his kinsmen, and 
Abu Bakr, and a few others who were either distinguished by their rank or possessed some 
influence among the Quraish, all other converts were subjected to different sorts of torture. Some 
of them were thrown into prison, starved, and then flogged. The hill of Ramada and the place 
called Bata thus became scenes of cruel torture. 

Quraish fear spread of Islam - Try in vain to blackmail Prophet 

One day the Quraish tried to induce the Prophet to discontinue his teachings of the new religion, 
which had sown discord among their people. 'Utba Ibn Rabi'a, was delegated to see the Prophet 
and speak to him. 'Utba said: "O son of my brother, you are distinguished by your qualities; yet 
you have sown discord among our people and cast dissension in our families; you denounced our 
gods and goddesses and you charge our ancestors with impiety. Now we are come to make a 
proposition to you, and I ask you to think well before you reject it." "I am listening to you, O 
father of Walid," said the Prophet. "O son of my brother, if by this affair you intend to acquire 
riches, honors, and dignity, we are willing to collect for you a fortune larger than is possessed by 
any one of us; we shall make you our chief and will do nothing without you. If you desire 
dominion, we shall make you our king; and if the demon which possesses you cannot be subdued, 
we will bring you doctors and give them riches until they cure you." When 'Utba had finished his 
discourse, the Prophet said: "Now listen to me, O father of Walid." "I listen." He replied. The 
Prophet, recited to him the first thirteen verses of Surah Fussilat, which maybe interpreted as 
follows: 

"Ha Mim (These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah Alone knows 
their meanings). A revelation from Allah the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. A Book 
whereof the Verses are explained in detail; - a Quran in Arabic for people who know. Giving 
glad tidings (of Paradise to the one who believes in the Oneness of Allah, Islamic Monotheism) 
and fears Allah much (abstains from all kinds of sins and evil deeds) and loves Allah much 
(performing all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained), and warning (ofpunishment in the 
Hellfire to be the one who disbelieves in the Oneness of Allah), but most of them turn away, so 
they listen not. 

And they say: "Our hearts are under coverings (screened) from that to which you invite us, and 
in our ears is deafness, and between us and you is a screen, so work you (on your way); verily we 
are working (on our way). 

Say (O Muhammad): "I am only a human being like you. It is inspired in me that your Ilah 
(God) is One Ilah (God - Allah), therefore take the Straight Path to Him (with true Faith - 



Islamic Monotheism) and obedience to Him, and seek forgiveness of Him. And woe to 
Al-Mushrikeen; (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, and disbeliveers in the Oneness of Allah, etc, 
those who worship others along with or set up rivals or partners to Allah etc.) Those who give 
not the Zakat and they are disbeliveers in the Hereafter. Truly, those who believe (in the Oneness 
of Allah and in His Messenger Muhammad - Islamic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds 
for them will be an endless reward that will never stop (Paradise). 

Say (O Muhammad): "Do you verily disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in two Days and 
you set up rivals (in worship) with Him? That is the Lord of the Alamin (mankind, jinn and all 
that exists). 

He placed therein (the earth) firm mountains from above it, and He blessed it, and measured 
therein its sustenance (for its dwellers) in four Days equal (all these four days were equal in the 
length of time), for all those who ask (about its creation). Then He Istawa (rose over) towards 
the heaven when it was smoke, and said to it and to the earth: "Come both of you willingly or 
unwillingly." They both said: "We come, willingly." Then He completed and finished from their 
creation as seven heavens in two days and he made in each heaven with lamps (stars) to b e an 
adornment as well as to guard (from the devils by using them as missiles against the devils). 

Such is the Decree of Him the All Mighty, The All Knower. 

But if they turn away, then say (O Muhammad): "I have warned you of a Sa'iqa (a destruction 
awful cry, torment, hit, a thunder bolt) like the Sa'iqa which overtook 'Ad and Thamud (people)." 
(Ch 41:1-13 Quran). 

When the Prophet had finished his recitation, he said to 'Utba: "This is my reply to your 
proposition; now take what course you find best." 

Quraish increase Persecution - First Hijra of 615 C.E, to Abyssinia 

Persecution by the Quraish grew fiercer every day and the sufferings of the Prophet's disciples 
became unbearable. He had heard of the righteousness, tolerance, and hospitality of the 
neighboring Christian king of Abyssinia. He recommended such of his companions who were 
without protection to seek refuge in the kingdom of that pious king, A1 Najashi (Negus). Some 
fifteen of the unprotected adherents of Islam promptly availed themselves of the advice and sailed 
to Abyssinia. Here they met with a very kind reception from the Negus. This is called the first 
hijrah (migration) in the history of Islam and occurred in the fifth year of the Prophet 
Muhammad's mission, A.D. 615. These emigrants were soon followed by many of their fellow 
sufferers, until the number reached eighty-three men and eighteen women. 

The hostile Quraish, furious at the escape of their victims, sent deputes to the king of Abyssinia to 
request him to deliver up the refugees, that they might be put to death for adjuring their old 
religion and embracing a new one. The king summoned the poor fugitives and inquired of them 
what was the religion, which they had adopted in preference to their old faith. Ja'far, son of Abu 
Talib and brother of'Ali, acted as spokesman for the exiles. He spoke thus; "O king, we were 
plunged in the depth of ignorance and barbarism, we adored idols, we lived in unchastity, and we 
ate dead bodies, and we spoke abomination, we disregarded every feeling of humanity and sense 
of duty towards our neighbors, and we knew no law but that of the strong, when Allah raised 
among us a man, of whose birth, truthfulness, honesty, and purity we were aware. He called us to 
profess the Unity of Allah and taught us to associate nothing with Him; he forbade us the worship 
of idols and enjoined us to speak the truth, to be faithful to our trusts, to be merciful, and to 



regard the rights of neighbors; he forbade us to speak evil of the worship of Allah and not to 
return to the worship of idols of woos and stone and to abstain from evil, to offer prayers, to give 
aims, to observe the fast. We have believed in him, we have aeeepted his teaehings and his 
injunetions to worship Allah alone and to assoeiate nothing with Him. Henee our people have 
perseeuted us, trying to make us forego the worship of Allah and return to the worship of idols of 
wood and stone and other abominations. They have tortured us and injured us until, finding no 
safety among them, we have eome to your kingdom trusting you will give us proteetion against 
their perseeution." 

Al-Najashi (Negus), King of Abyssinia protects Muslims 

After hearing the above speeeh, the hospitable king ordered the deputies to return to their people 
in safety and not to interfere with their fugitives. Thus the emigrants passed the period of exile in 
peaee and eomfort. 

While the followers of the Prophet sought safety in foreign lands against the perseeution of their 
people, he eontinued his warnings to the Quraish more strenuously than ever. Again they eame to 
him with offers of riehes and honor, whieh he firmly and utterly refused. But they moeked at him 
and urged him for miraeles to prove his mission. He used to answer: "Allah has not sent me to 
work wonders; He has sent me to preaeh to you." 

Thus diselaiming all power of wonder working, the Prophet ever rested the truth of his divine 
mission upon his wise teaehings. He addressed himself to the inner eonseiousness of man, to his 
eommon sense and to his own better judgement.- 

"Say (O Muhammad): "I am only a human being like you. It is inspired in me that your Ilah 
(God) is One Ilah (God- Allah), therefore take the Straight Path to Him (with true Faith - 
Islamic Monotheism) and obedience to Him and seek forgiveness of Him. And woe to Al 
Mushrikeen; (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, and disbeliveers in the Oneness of Allah etc., those 
who worship others along with Allah or set up rivals or partners to Allah etc. (Ch 41:6 Quran) 

Despite all the exhortation of the Prophet, the Quraish persisted in asking him for a sign. They 
insisted that unless some sign be sent down to him from his Lord, they would not believe. The 
disbeliveers used to ask: "Why has Muhammad not been sent with miraeles like previous 
prophets?" T he Prophet replied: "Beeause miraeles had proved inadequate to eonvinee. Noah 
was sent with signs, and with what effeet? Where was the lost tribe of Thamud? They had refused 
to reeeive the preaehing of the Prophet Salfti, unless he showed them a sign and eaused the roek 
to bring forth a living eamel. He did what they asked. In seorn they eut the eamel's feet and then 
daring the prophet to fulfill his threats of judgment, were found dead in their beds the next 
morning, strieken by the angel of the Lord." 

The Holy Quran is a Miracle 

There are some seventeen plaees in the Quran, in whieh the Prophet Muhammad is ehallenged to 
work a sign, and he answered them all to the same or similar effeet: Allah has the power of 
working miraeles, and has not been believed; there were greater miraeles in nature than any whieh 
eould be wrought outside of it; and the Quran itself was a great, everlasting miraele. The Quran, 
the Prophet used to assert to the disbeliveers, is a book of blessings whieh is a warning for the 



whole world; it is a complete guidance and explains everything necessary; it is a reminder of what 
is imprinted on human nature and is free from every discrepancy and from error and falsehood. It 
is a book of true guidance and a light to all. 

As to the sacred idols, so much honored and esteemed by the pagan Arabs, the Prophet openly 
recited: 

"They are but names which you have named - you and your fathers - for which Allah has sent 
down no authority." (CH 53:23 Quran) 

When the Prophet thus spoke reproachfully of the sacred gods of the Quraish, the latter redoubled 
their persecution. But the Prophet, nevertheless, continued his preaching undaunted but the 
hostility of his enemies or by their bitter persecution of him. And despite all opposition and 
increased persecution, the new faith gained ground. The national fair at Okadh near Mecca 
attracted many desert Bedouins and trading citizen of distant towns. These listened to the 
teachings of the Prophet, to his admonitions, and to his denunciations of their sacred idols and of 
their superstitions. They carried back all that they had heard to their distant homes, and thus the 
advent of the Prophet was made know to almost all parts of the peninsula. 

Makkans plea to Abu Talib to stop tbe Prophet 

The Meccans, however, were more than ever furious at the Prophet's increasing preaching against 
their religion. They asked his uncle Abu Talib to stop him, but he could not do anything. At, as 
the Prophet persisted in his ardent denunciations against their ungodliness and impiety, they 
turned him out from the Ka'ba where he used to sit and preach, and subsequently went in a body 
to Abu Talib. They urged the venerable chief to prevent his nephew from abusing their gods any 
longer or uttering any ill words against their ancestors. They warned Abu Talib that if he would 
not do that, he would be excluded from the communion of his people and driven to side with 
Muhammad; the matter would then be settled by fight until one of the two parties were 
exterminated. 

Abu Talib neither wished to separate himself from his people, nor forsake his nephew for the 
idolaters to revenge themselves upon. He spoke to the Prophet very softly and begged him to 
abandon his affair. To this suggestion the Prophet firmly replied: "O my uncle, if they placed the 
sun in my right hand and the moon in my left hand to cause me to renounce my task, verily I 
would not desist therefrom until Allah made manifest His cause or I perished in the attempt." The 
Prophet, overcome by the thought that his uncle and protector was willing to desert him, turned 
to depart. But Abu Talib called him loudly to come back, and he came. "Say whatever you please; 
for by the Lord I shall not desert you ever." 

Abu Talib protects bis Nepbew, tbe Prophet 

The Quraish again attempted in vain to cause Abu Talib to abandon his nephew. The venerable 
chief declared his intention to protect his nephew against any menace or violence. He appealed to 
the sense of honor of the two families of the Bani Hashim and the Bani Muttalib, both families 
being kinsmen of the Prophet, to protect their member from falling a victim to the hatred of rival 



parties. All the members of the two families nobly responded to the appeal of Abu Tahb exeept 
Abu Lahab, one of the Prophet's uneles, who took part with the perseeutors. 

Umar Al-Khattab submits to Islam 

During this period, 'Umar Al-Khattab adopted Islam. In him the new faith gained a valuable 
adherent and an important faetor in the future development and propagation of Islam. Hitherto he 
had been a violent opposer of the Prophet and a bitter enemy of Islam. His eonversion is said to 
have been worked by the miraeulous eflfeet on his mind of a Surah of the Quran whieh his sister 
was reading in her house, where he had gone with the intention of killing her for adopting Islam. 
Thus the party of the Prophet had been strengthened by the eonversation by his unele Hamza, a 
man of great valor and merit; and of Abu Bakr and 'Umar, both men of great energy and 
reputation. The Muslims now ventured to perform their devotions in publie. 

Quraisb divided into two factions 

Alarmed at the bold part whieh the Prophet and his followers were not able to assume, and roused 
by the return of the deputies from Abyssinia and the announeement of their unsueeessful mission, 
the Quraisb determined to eheek by a deeisive blow any further progress of Islam. Towards this 
end, in the seventh year of the mission, they made a solemn eovenant against the deseendants of 
Hashim and Muttalib, engaging themselves to eontraet no marriage with any of them and to have 
no oommunieation with them. Upon this, the Quraish beeame divided into two faetions, and the 
two families of Hashim and Muttalib all repaired to Abu Talib as their ehief 

Abu Labab's hatred of Islam 

Abu Lahab, the Prophet's unele, however, out of his inveterate hatred of his nephew and his 
doetrine, went over to the opposite party, whose ehief was Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb, of the family of 
Umayya. The perseeuted party, Muslims as well as idolaters betook themselves to a defile on the 
eastern skirts of Meeea. They lived in this defensive position for three years. The provisions, 
whieh they had carried with them, were soon exhausted. Probably they would have entirely 
perished but for the sympathy and occasional help received from less bigoted compatriots. 

Reconciliation of the Quraish 

Towards the beginning of the tenth year of the mission, reconciliation was concluded between the 
Quraish and the two families of Hashim and Abdul Muttalib through the intermediation of 
Hisham, Ibn Umar, and Zobeir, Ibn Abu Umayya. Thus, the alliance against the two families was 
abohshed, and they were able to return to Mecca. 

During the period the Prophet and his kinspeople passed in their defensive position, Islam made 
no progress outside; but in the sacred months, when violence was considered sacrilege, the 
Prophet used to come out of his temporary prison to preach Islam to the pilgrims. 

Death of Abu Talib and Khadijah 


In the following year, both Abu Talib and Khadijah died. Thus the Prophet lost in Abu Talib the 



kind guardian of his youth who had hitherto protected him against his enemies, and in Khadijah 
his most encouraging companion. She was ever his angel of hope and consolation. The Prophet, 
weighed down by the loss of his amiable protector and his beloved wife, without hope of turning 
the Quraish from idolatry, with a saddened heart, yet full of trust, resolved to exercise his ministry 
in some of her field. He chose Taif, a town about sixty miles east of Mecca, where he went 
accompanied by a faithful servant Zaid. 

The tribe of Thakif, who were the inhabitants of Taif, received Muhammad very coldly. However, 
he stayed there for one month. Though the more considerate and better sort of men treated him 
with a little respect, the slaves and common people refused to listen to his teachings; they were 
outrageously indignant at his invitation to abandon the gods they worshipped with such freedom 
of morals and lightness of heart. At length they rose against him, and bringing him to the wall of 
the city, obliged him to depart and return to Mecca. 

People of Madina accept Prophet 

The repulse greatly discouraged his followers; however, the Prophet boldly continued to preach to 
the public assemblies at the pilgrimage and gained several new converts, among whom were six of 
the city of Yahtrib (later called Medina), of the Jewish tribe of Khazraj. When these Yathribites 
returned home, they spread the news among their people that a prophet had arisen among the 
Arabs who was to call them to Allah and put an end to their inquiries. 

Miraj (Ascension to the Heavens) on a creature called Buraq 

In the twelfth year of his mission, the Prophet made his night journey from Mecca to Jerusalem, 
and thence to heaven. His journey, known in history as Miraj (Ascension) was a real bodily one 
and not only a vision. It was at this time that Allah ordered the Muslims to pray the five daily 
prayers. 

Almighty Allah had said: 

“Glorified (and Exalted) be He (Allah) (above all that evil they associate with Him), Who took 
His slave Muhammad for a journey by night from AL Masjid al Haram (at Makka) to the 
farthest mosque (in Jerusalem), the neighborhood whereof We have blessed, order that We might 
show him (Muhammad) of OurAyat (proofs, evidences, lessons, signs, etc.). Verily, He is the All 
Hearer, the All Seer." (Ch 17:1 Quran) 

Abbas Ibn Malik reported that Malik Ibn Sasaa said that Allah's Messenger described to them his 
Night Journey saying: "While I was lying in Al-Hatim or Al-Hijr, suddenly someone came to me 
and cut my body open from here to here." I asked Al-Jarud, who was by my side, "What does he 
mean?" He said: "It means from his throat to his public area," or said, "From the top of the chest." 
The Prophet further said, "He then took out my heart. Then a gold tray of Belief was brought to 
me and my heart was washed and was filled (with Belief) and then returned to its original place. 
Then a white animal which was smaller than a mule and bigger than a donkey was brought to me." 
(On this Al-Jarud asked: "Was it in the Buraq, O Abu Hamza?" I (Anas) replied in the affirmative. 
The Prophet said: "The animal's step (was so wide that it) reached the farthest point within the 



reach of the anima