ls' sight. I was carried on it. 


Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with Adam (Hadith) 

Gabriel set out with me till we reached the nearest heaven. 

"When he asked for the gate to be opened, it was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered, 'Gabriel.' It 
was asked, 'Who is accompany you?' Gabriel replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has Muhammad 
been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it was said. 'He is welcomed. What an 
excellent visit his is!' The gate was opened, and when I went over the first heaven, I saw Adam 
there. Gabriel said to me: 'This is your father, Adam; pay him your greetings.' So I greeted him 
and he returned the greetings to me and said: 'You are welcomed, O pious son and pious Prophet.' 

Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with John and Jesus (Hadith) 

Then Gabriel ascended with me till we reached the second heaven. Gabriel asked for the gate to 
be opened. It was asked: 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered: 'Gabriel.' It was asked: 'Who is 
accompany you?' Gabriel replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked: 'Has he been called?' Gabriel 
answered in the affirmative. Then it was said: 'He is welcomed. What an excellent visit his is!' The 
gate was opened. "When I went over the second heaven, here I saw John (Yahya) and Jesus (Isa), 
who were cousins of each other. Gabriel said to me: "These are John and Jesus; pay them your 
greetings.' So I greeted them and both of them returned my greetings to me and said, 'You are 
welcomed, O pious brother and pious Prophet.' 

Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with Joseph (Hadith) 

Then Gabriel ascended with me to the third heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. IT was 
asked 'Who is it?' And Gabriel replied: 'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompany you?' Gabriel 
replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it 
was said: 'He is welcomed, what an excellent visit his is!' The gate was opened, and when I went 
over the third heaven there I saw Joseph (Yusuf), Gabriel said to me: 'This is Joseph, pay him 
your greetings.' So I greeted him and he returned the greetings to me and said: You are 
welcomed, O pious brother and pious Prophet.' 

Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with Enoch (Hadith) 

Then Gabriel ascended with me to the fourth heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. IT was 
asked 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied, 'Gabriel' It was asked: 'Who is accompany you?' Gabriel replied: 
'Muhammad.' It was asked: 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it was 
said: 'He is welcomed, what an excellent visit his is!' "The gate was opened, and when I went over 
the fourth heaven, there I saw Enoch (Idris), Gabriel said to me: 'This is Enoch; pay him your 
greetings.' So I greeted him and he returned the greetings to me and said: 'You are welcomed O 
pious brother and pious Prophet.' 

Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with Aaron (Hadith) 

Then Gabriel ascended with me to the fifth heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was 



asked; 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied: 'Gabriel.' It was asked; 'Who is aceompany you?' Gabriel 
replied 'Muhammad.' It was asked: 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it 
was said: 'He is welcomed, what an excellent visit his is!' So when I went over the fifth heaven, 
there I saw Aaron (Harun), Gabriel said to me: "This is Aaron; pay hyour greetings.' So I greeted 
him and he returned the greetings to me and said: "You are welcomed, O pious brother and pious 
Prophet." 

Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with Moses (Hadith) 

Then Gabriel ascended with me to the sixth heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was 
asked; 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied: 'Gabriel.' It was asked; 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel 
replied; 'Muhammad.' It was said: 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. It was 
said: 'He is welcomed. What an excellent visit his is!' "When I went over the sixth heaven, there I 
saw Moses (Musa). Gabriel said to me: "This is Moses; pay him your greeting. So I greeted him 
and he returned the greetings to me and said: "You are welcomed, O pious brother and pious 
Prophet." When I left him (Moses) he wept. Someone asked him: 'What makes you weep?' Moses 
said: 'I weep because after me there has been sent (as Prophet) a young man whose followers will 
enter Paradise in greater numbers than my followers.' 

Miraj - Muhammad's encounter with Ahraham (Hadith) 

Then Gabriel ascended with me to the seventh heaven and asked for its gate to be opened. It was 
asked; 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied: 'Gabriel.' It was asked; 'Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel 
replied; 'Muhammad.' It was asked: 'Has he been called?' Gabriel replied in the affirmative. Then it 
said: 'He is welcomed. What an excellent visit his is!' "So when I went (over the seventh heaven), 
there I saw Abraham (Ibrahim). Gabriel said to me; 'This is your father; pay your greetings to 
him.' So I greeted him and he returned the greetings to me and said: 'You are welcomed, O pious 
son and pious Prophet.' 

Then I was made to ascend to Sidrat-ul-Muntaha (the Lote Tree of the utmost boundary). 

Behold! Its Ifuits were like the jars of Hajr (a place near Medina) and its leaves were as big as the 
ears of elephants. Gabriel said: "This is the Lote Tree of the utmost and boundary.' Behold! There 
ran four rivers, two were hidden and two were visible, I asked: 'What are these two kinds of 
rivers, O Gabriel?' He replied: 'As for the hidden rivers, they are two rivers in Paradise and the 
visible rivers are the Nile and the Euphrates.' 

Moses advises Muhammad to plea to Allah to lessen prayers 

"Then Al-Bait-ul-Ma'mur (the Sacred House) was shown to me and a container full of wine and 
another full of milk and a third full of honey were brought to me. I took the milk. Gabriel 
remarked: 'This is the Islamic religion which you and your followers are following.' Then the 
prayers were enjoined on me: they were fifty prayers a day. When I returned, I passed by Moses, 
who asked me; 'What have you been ordered to do?' I replied: 'I have been ordered to offer fifty 
prayers a day.' Moses said: 'Your followers cannot bear fifty prayers a day, and by AUah I have 
tested people before you, and I have tried my level best with Bani Israel in vain. Go back to your 
Lord and ask for reduction to lessen your followers" burden.' So I went back, and Allah reduced 



ten prayers for me. Then again I eame to Moses, but he repeated the same as he had said before. 
Then again I went baek to Allah, and He redueed ten more prayers. When I eame to Moses he 
said the same. I went baek to Allah, and He ordered m to observe ten prayers a day. When I eame 
baek to Moses, he repeated the same adviee, so I went baek to Allah and was ordered to observe 
five prayers a day. 

"When I eame baek to Moses, he said: 'What have you been ordered?' I replied: 'I have been 
ordered to observe five prayers a day.' He said: 'Your followers eannot bear fear prayers a day, 
and no doubt, I have got an experienee of the people before you, and I have tried my level best 
with Bani Israel, so go baek to your Lord and ask for reduetion to lesson your followers' burden.' 

I said: 'I have requested so mueh of my Lord that I feel ashamed, but I am satisfied now and 
surrender to Allah's Order.' When I left, I heard a voiee saying: 'I have passed My order and have 
lessened the burden of My worshippers.'" 

Women's Oath - People of Yathrib (Madina) submit to Islam 

In this year, twelve men of Yathrib, of whom ten were of the Jewish tribe of Khazraj and the other 
two of Aws, eame to Meeean and took an oath of fidelity to the Prophet at Al-Aqaba, a hill on the 
north of that eity. This oath was eaUed the Women's' Oath, not that any women were present at 
this time, but beeause a man was not thereby obliged to take up arms in defense of the Prophet or 
his religion, it being the same oath that was afterwards exaeted of the women. This oath was as 
follows: "We will not assoeiate anything with Allah; we will not steal nor eornmit adultery or 
fomieation, nor kill our ehildren (as the pagan Arabs used to do when they apprehended that they 
would not be able to maintain them), nor forge ealumnies; we will obey the Prophet in everything 
that is reasonable, and we will be faithful to him in well and sorrow." When they had solemnly 
engaged to do all this, the Prophet sent one of his diseiples, Mus'ab Ibn Umair, home with them to 
teaeh them the fundamental doetrines and eeremonies of the religion. Mus'ab, having arrived at 
Yathrib by the assistanee of those who had been formerly eonverted, gained several new eonverts, 
partieularly Usaid Ibn Khudair, a ehief of man of the eity, and Sa'd Ibn Mu'adh, prinee of the tribe 
of Aws. Islam spread so fast that there was a searee a house that did not have some Muslims in it. 

The next year, being the thirteenth of the mission (A.D. 622) Mus'ab returned from Yathrib 
aoeompanied by seventy-three men and two women of that eity who had adopted Islam, besides 
others who were as yet unbelievers. On their arrival, these Yathribites immediately sent to the 
Prophet and invited him to their eity. The Prophet was not in great need of sueh assistanee, for his 
opponents had by this time grown so powerful in Meeea that he eould not stay there mueh longer 
without imminent danger. He therefore aeeepted their proposal and met them one night by 
appointment at Al Aqaba attended by his unele Al-Abbas, who, though he as not then a eonvert, 
wished his nephew well. 

Al Abbas made a speeeh to those of Yathrib wherein he told them that, as the Prophet 
Muhammad was obliged to quit his native eity and seek shelter elsewhere, and they had offered 
him their proteetion, they would do well not to deeeive him; and that if they were not firmly 
resolved to defend and not to betray him, they had better deelare their minds and let him provide 
for his safety in some other manner. Upon their professing their sineerity, the Prophet swore to be 
faithful to them, on eondition that they should worship none but Allah observe the preeepts of 



Islam, obey the Prophet in aU that was right, and proteet him against all in s ults as heartily as they 
would their wives and famihes. They then asked him what would be their return, if they should 
happen to be killed in the eause of Allah; he answered; "Paradise," whereupon they pledged their 
faith to him and his eause. 

The Hijra - People of Yathrib (Madina) welcome Muslims 

The Prophet then seleeted twelve men out of their number to aet as his delegates. Thus was 
eoneluded the seeond eovenant of A1 Aqaba. The Yathribites returned home leaving the Prophet 
to arrange for the journey to their eity. The Prophet direeted his followers to seek immediate 
safety at Yathrib, whieh they aeeordingly did. About one hundred families silently disappeared 
from Meeea and proeeeded to Yathrib, where they were reeeived with enthusiasm and mueh 
hospitality. Finally, all the diseiples had gone to Yathrib. The Prophet alone remained at Meeea, 
keeping with him only his young eousin, Ali, and his devoted friend Abu Bakr. 

The Makkans plot to kill Allah’s Prophet 

The Meeeans, fearing the eonsequenee of this new allianee, began to think seriously of preventing 
Muhammad from eseaping to Yathrib. They met in aU haste. After several milder expedients had 
been rejected, they decided that he should be killed. They agreed that one man should be chosen 
out of every tribe and that each man should strike a blow at him with his sword so that 
responsibility of the guilt would rest equally on aU tribes. The Bani Hashim, Muhammad's own 
tribe, were much inferior and therefore would not be able to revenge their kinsman's death. 

A number of noble youths were selected for the bloody deed. As the night advanced, the assassins 
posted themselves round the Prophet's dwelling. They watched all night long, waiting to murder 
Muhammad when he should leave his house at the early dawn. By some the Prophet had warned 
of the danger, and he directed 'Ali to lie down in his place and wrap himself up in his green clock, 
which he did. The Prophet miraculously escaped through the window and he repaired to the house 
of Abu Bakr, unperceived by door. These, in the meantime, looking through a crevice and seeing 
'Ali, whom they mistook for Muhammad himself, asleep, continued watching there until morning. 
When 'Ali arose, they found themselves deceived. The fury of the Quraish was now unbounded. 
The news that the would be assassins had returned unsuccessful and that Muhammad had escaped 
aroused their whole energy. A price of a hundred camels was set upon Muhammad's head. 

A narration Aisha Bint Abu Bakr (Prophet's Wife) 

Narrated 'Aisha Bint Abu Bakr (the wife of the Prophet): "I never remembered my parents 
believing in any religion other than the true religion (Islam), and (I don't remember) a single day 
passing without our being visited by Allah's Messenger in the morning and in the evening. When 
the Muslims were put to test (troubled by the pagans), Abu Bakr set out migrating to the land of 
Abyssinia (Ethiopia), and when he reached Bark-al-Ghimad, Ibn Ad-Daghina, the chief of the 
tribe of Qara, met him and said, 'O Abu Bakr! Where are you going?' Abu Bakr replied; 'My 
people have turned me out (of my country), so I want to wander on the earth and worship my 
Lord.' Ibn Ad-Dhagina said: 'O Abu Bakr! A man like you should not leave his homeland, nor 
should he be driven out, because you help the destitute, earn their living, and you keep good 
relations with your kith and kin, help the weak and the poor, entertain guests generously, and help 



the calamity-stricken persons. Therefore, I am your protector. Go back and worship your Lord in 
your town.' 


"So Abu Bakr returned and Ibn Ad-Daghina accompanied him. In the evening Ibn Ad-Dhagina 
visited the nobles of Quraish and said to them. 'A man like Abu Bakr should not leave his 
homeland, nor should he be driven out. Do you (Quraish) drive out a man who helps the destitute, 
earns their living, keeps good relations with his kith and kin, helps the weak and poor, entertain 
guests generously and helps the calamity-stricken persons?' So the people of Quraish could not 
refuse Ibn Ad-Dhagina's protection, and they said to Ibn Ad-Daghina: 'Let Abu Bakr worship his 
Lord in his house. He can pray and recite there whatever he likes, but he should not hurt us with 
it, and should not do it publicly, because we are afraid that he may affect our women and 
children." Ibn Ad-Dhagina told Abu Bakr all of that. Abu Bakr stayed in that state, worshipping 
his Lord in his house. He did not pray publicly, nor did he recite Quran outside his house. 

Abu Bakr builds Mosque 

"Then a thought occurred to Abu Bakr to build a mosque in front of his house, and there he used 
to pray and recite the Quran. The women and children of the pagans began to gather around him 
in great number. They used to wonder at him and look at him. Abu Bakr was a man who used to 
weep too much, and he could not help weeping or reciting the Quran. That situation scared the 
nobles of the pagans of Quraish, so they sent for Ibn Ad-Daghina. When he came to them, they 
said: 'We accepted your protection of Abu Bakr on condition that he should worship his Lord in 
his house, but he has violated the conditions and he has built a mosque in front of his house where 
he prays and recites the Quran publicly. We are not afraid that he may affect our women and 
children unfavorably. So, prevent him from that. If he likes to confine the worship of his Lord to 
his house, he may do so, but if he insists on doing that openly, ask him to release you from your 
obligation to protect him, for we dislike to break our pact with you, but we deny Abu Bakr the 
right to announce his act publicly.' Ibn Ad-Dhagina went to Abu Bakr and said: 'O Abu Bakr! 

You know well what contract I have made on your behalf; now, you are either to abide by it, or 
else release me from my obligation of protecting you, because I do not want the Arabs hear that 
my people have dishonored a contract I have made on behalf of another man.' Abu Bakr replied: 'I 
release you from your pact to protect me and am pleased with the protection from AUah.' 

Aisha's narration's continues: "At that time the Prophet was in Mecca, and he said to the Muslims: 
'In a dream I have been shown your migration place, a land of date palm trees, between two 
mountains, the two stony tracts.' So, some people migrated to Medina, and most of those people 
who had previously migrated to the land of Ethiopia, returned to Medina. Abu Bakr also prepared 
to leave for Medina, but Allah's Messenger said to him: 'Wait for awhile, because I hope that I will 
be allowed to migrate also.' Abu Bakr replied: 'Do you indeed expect this? Let my father be 
sacrificed for you!' The Prophet said: 'Yes.' So Abu Bakr did not migrate for the sake of Allah's 
Messenger in order to accompany him. He fed two she camels he possessed with the leaves of 
As-Samur tree that fell on being struck by a stick for four months. 

"One day, while we were sitting in Abu Bakr's house at noon, someone said to Abu Bakr: 'This is 
Allah's Messenger with his head covered coming at a time at which he never used to visit us 
before.' Abu Bakr said: 'May my parents be sacrificed for him. By Allah he has not come at this 



hour except for a great necessity.' So Allah's Messenger came and asked permission to enter, and 
he was allowed to enter. When he entered, he said to Abu Bakr: "Tell everyone who is present 
with you to go away.' Abu Bakr replied: 'There are none but your family. May my father be 
sacrificed for you, O Allah's Messenger!' The Prophet said: 'I have been given permission to 
migrate.' Abu Bakr said: 'Shall I accompany you? May my father be sacrificed for you, O Allah's 
Messenger!' Allah's Messenger said: 'Yes.' Abu Bakr said, 'O Allah's Messenger! May my father 
be sacrificed for you, take one of these two she-camels of mine.' Allah's Messenger replied: 'I will 
accept it with payment.' So we prepared the baggage quickly and put some journey food in a 
leather bag for them. Asma, Abu Bakr's daughter, cut a piece from her waist belt and tied the 
mouth of the leather bag with it, and for that reason she was named 'Dhat-un-Nitaqain' (the owner 
of two belts). 

"Then Allah's Messenger and Abu Bakr reached a cave on the mountain of Thaur and stayed there 
for three nights. Abdullah Ibn Abi Bakr who was an intelligent and sagacious youth, used to stay 
with them overnight. He used to leave them before daybreak so that in the morning he would be 
with Quraish as if he had spent the night in Mecca. He would keep in mind any plot made against 
them and when it became dark he would go and inform them of it. 'Amir Ibn Fuhaira, the freed 
slave of Abu Bakr, used to bring the milch sheep (of his master, Abu Bakr) to them a little while 
after nightfall in order to rest the sheep there. So they always had fresh milk at night, the milk of 
their sheep, and the milk which they warmed by throwing heated stones in it. 'Amir Ibn Fuhaira 
would then call the herd away when it was still dark (before daybreak). He did the same in each of 
those three nights. Allah's Messenger and Abu Bakr had hired a man from the tribe of Bani 
Ad-Dail from the family of Bani Abd Ibn Adi as an expert guide, and he was in alliance with the 
family of Al-As Ibn Wail As-Sahmi and he was in the religion of the infidels of Quraish. The 
Prophet and Abu Bakr trusted him and gave him their two she-camels and took his promise to 
bring their two she-camels to the cave of the mountain of Thaur in the morning after three nights 
later. And when they set out, Amir Ibn Futhaira and the guide went along with them and the guide 
led them, along the seashore." (Sahib Al-Bukhari). 

The nephew of Suraqa Ibn Ju'sham said that his father informed him that he heard Suraqa Ibn 
Jusham saying: "The messengers of the pagans of Quraish came to us declaring that they had 
assigned for the persons who would kill or arrest Allah's Messenger and Abu Bakr, a reward 
equal to their bloodmoney. While I was sitting in one of the gatherings of my tribe, Bani Mudlij, a 
man from them came to us and stood up while we were sitting and said: 'O Suraqa! No , I have 
just seen some people far away on the seashore, and I think they are Muhammad and his 
companions.' I, too, realized that it must have been they. But I said: 'No, it is not they, but you 
have seen so-and-so and so-and-so, whom we saw set out.' I stayed in the gathering for a while 
and then got up and left for my home, and ordered my slave-girl to get my horse, which was 
behind a hillock, and keep it ready for me. 

"Then I took my spear and left by the back door of my house dragging the lower end of the spear 
on the ground and keeping it low. Then I reached my horse, mounted it and made it gallop. When 
I approached them (Muhammad and Abu Bakr), my horse stumbled and I fell down from it. Then 
I stood up, gold hold of my quiver and took out the divining arrows and drew lots as to whether I 
should harm them or not, and the lot which I disliked came out. But I remounted my horse and let 
it gallop, giving no importance to the divining arrows. When I heard the recitation of the Qur'an 



by Allah's Messenger who did not look hither and thither while Abu Bakr was doing it often, 
suddenly the forelegs of my horse sank into the ground up to the knees, and I fell down from it. 
Then I rebuked it, and it got up but could hardly take out its forelegs from the ground, and when 
it stood up straight again, its forelegs caused dust to rise up in the sky like smoke. Then again I 
drew lots with the divining arrows, and the lot which I disliked came out. So I called upon them 
to feel secure. They stopped, and I remounted my horse and went to them. When I saw how I had 
been hampered from harming them, it came to my mind that the cause of Allah's Messenger 
(Islam) would become victorious. So I said to them: 'Your people have assigned a reward equal 
to bloodmoney for your head.' Then I told them all the plans the people of Mecca had made 
concerning them. Then I offered them some journey food and goods, but they refused to take 
anything and did not ask for anything, but the Prophet said: 'Do not tell others about us.' Then I 
requested him to write for me a statement of security and peace. He ordered 'Amir Ibn Fuhaira, 
who wrote it for me on a parchment, and then Allah's Messenger proceeded on his way." (Sahih 
Al-Bukhari) 

Holy Prophet travels to Madina (Hijra) 

"Narrated 'Urwa Ibn Az-Zubair: "Allah's Messenger met Az Zubair in a caravan of Muslim 
merchants who were returning from Sham. Az -Zubair provided Allah's Messenger and Abu Bakr 
with white clothes to wear. When the Muslims of Medina heard the new of the departure of 
Allah's Messenger from Mecca (towards Medina), they started going to the Harra every morning,. 
They would wait for him till the heat of the noon forced them to return. One day, after waiting for 
a long while, they returned home, and when they went into their houses, a Jew climbed up to the 
roof of one of the forts of his people to look for something, and he saw Allah's Messenger and his 
companions, dressed in white clothes, emerging out of the desert mirage. 

"The Jew could not help shouting at the top of his voice: 'O you Arabs! Here is your great man 
whom you have been waiting for!' So all the Muslims rushed to their arms and received Allah's 
Messenger on the summit of Harra. The Prophet turned with them to the right and alighted at the 
quarters of Bani Amr Ibn Auf, and this was on Monday in the month of Rabi ul Awal. Abu Bakr 
stood up, receiving the people, while Allah's Messenger sat down and kept silent. Some of the 
Ansar who came and had not seen Allah's Messenger before began greeting Abu Bakr, but when 
the sunshine fell on Allah's Messenger and Abu Bakr came forward and shaded him with his sheet, 
only then the people came to know Allah's Messenger. Allah's Messenger stayed with Bani Amr 
Ibn Auf for ten nights and established the mosque (Mosque of Quba) which was founded on piety. 
Allah's Messenger prayed in it and then mounted his she-camel and proceeded on, accompanied 
by the people till his she-camel knelt down at the place of the Mosque of Allah's Messenger at 
Medina. Some Muslims used to pray there in those days, and that place was a yard for drying 
dates belonging to Suhail and Sahl, the orphan boys who were under the guardianship of Asad In 
Zurara. When his she-camel knelt down, Allah's Messenger said: 'This place, AUah willing, will be 
our abiding place.' Allah's Messenger then called the two boys and told them to suggest a price for 
that yard so that he might take it as a mosque. The two boys said: 'No, but we will give it as a 
gift, O Allah's Messenger!' Allah's Messenger then built a mosque there. The Prophet himself 
started carrying unburned bricks for its building and while doing so, he was saying: 'This load is 
better than the load of Khaibar, for it is more pious in the Sight of Allah and purer and better 
rewardable.' He was also saying: 'O Allah! The actual reward is the reward in the Hereafter, so 



bestow Your Mercy on the Ansar and the Emigrants.' Thus the Prophet recited (by way of 
proverb) the poem of some Muslim poet whose name is unknown to me." (Ibn Shibab said, 'In the 
hadiths, it does not occur that Allah's Messenger recited a complete poetic verse other than this 
one.') (Sahih Al-Bukhari) 

Hijra - Islamic Calendar marks this date 

Thus was accomplished the hijrah, or the flight of Muhammad as called in European annals, from 
which the Islamic calendar dates. 

Yathrib renamed Al-Madina, Al-Munawara - "The Illuminated City" 

When the Prophet Muhammad and his companions settled at Yathrib, this city changed its name, 
and henceforth was called, Al-Medina, Al-Munawara, the Illuminated City, or more shortly, 
Medina, the City. It is situated about eleven-day's journey to the north of Mecca. At that time it 
was ruled by two Kahtanite tribes, Aws and Khazraj. These two tribes, however, were constantly 
quarreling among themselves. It was only about that time when the Prophet announced his 
mission at Mecca that these tribes, after long years of continuous warfare, entered on a period of 
comparative peace. When the Prophet settled at Medina, the tribes of Aws and Khazraj forgot 
entirely their old feuds and were united together in the bond of Islam. Their old divisions were 
soon efiaced and the Ansar", the Helpers of the Prophet, became the common designation of all 
Medinites who had helped the Prophet in his cause. Those who emigrated with him from Mecca 
received the title of "Muhajereen" or the Emigrants. The Prophet, in order to unite both classes in 
closer bonds, established between them a brotherhood, which linked them together as children of 
the same parents, with the Prophet as their guardian. 

Allah's Apostle Settles in Madina 

The first step the Prophet took, after his settlement at Medina, was to built a mosque for the 
worship of Allah according to principles of Islam. Also, houses for the accommodation of the 
emigrants were soon erected. 

Muhammad's Charter - Jews and Muslims unite to defend against enemies 

Medina and its suburb were at this time inhabited by three distinct parties, the Emigrants, the 
Helpers, and the Jews. In order to weld them together into an orderly federation, the Prophet 
granted a charter to the people, clearly defining their rights and obligations. This charter 
represented the framework of the first commonwealth organized by the Prophet. It started thus: 

'In the name of he Most Merciful and Compassionate Eord, this charter is given by Muhammad, 
the Messenger of Allah to all believers, whether of Quraish or Medina, and all individuals of 
whatever origin who have made common cause with them, who shall all constitute one nation." 
The following are some extracts from the charter: The state of peace and war shall be common to 
all Muslims; no one among them shall have the right of concluding peace with, or declaring war 
against, the enemies of his co-religionists. The Jews who attach themselves to our commonwealth 
shall be protected from all in s ults and vexations; they shall have an equal right with our people to 
our assistance and good offices. The Jews of the various branches and all others doiciled in 



Medina shall form with the Muslims one eomposite nation; they shall praetiee their religion as 
freely as the Muslims. The allies of the Jews shall enjoy the same seeurity and freedom. The guilty 
shall be pursued and punished. The Jews shall join the Muslims in defending Medina all enemies. 
The interior of Medina shall be a saered plaee for all who aeeept this eharter. All true Muslims 
shall hold in abhorrenee every man guilty of erime, injustiee or disorder; no one shaU uphold the 
eulpable, though he be his nearest kin. 

After dealing with the interior management of the State, the eharter eoneluded as follows: "All 
future disputes arising among those who aeeept this eharter shall be referred, under Allah to the 
Prophet." 

Thus this eharter put an end to the state of anarehy that prevailed among the Arabs. It eonstituted 
the Prophet Muhammad as ehief magistrate of the nation. 

Charter faces Mutiny (Inside enemies) - The Hypocrites and unsatisfied Jews 

The party of the Ansars, or Helpers, ineluded some lukewarm eonverts who retained an 
ill-eoneealed predileetion for idolatry. These were headed by Abdullah Ibn Ubai, a man with some 
elaims to distinetion. They ostensibly joined Islam, but in seeret were disaffected. They often were 
a source of considerable danger to the newborn commonwealth and required unceasing 
watchfulness on the part of the Prophet. Towards them he always showed the greatest patience 
and forbearance, hoping in the end to win them over to the faith, which expectations were fully 
justified by the result. While the death of Abdullah Ibn Ubai, his party which were known as the 
party of the "Munafiqeen" (the Hypocrites) disappeared. 

The Jews who constituted the third party of the Medinites were, however, the most serious 
element of danger. No kindness or generous treatment on the part of the Prophet would seem to 
satisfy them. They soon broke off and ranged themselves with the enemies of the new faith. They 
did not hesitate to declare openly that they preferred idolatry, with its attendant evils, to the faith 
of Islam. Thus, the Prophet had to keep an eye on his enemies outside Medina, on the one hand, 
and those within the city on the other. The Meccans who had sworn Muhammad's death were well 
acquainted, thanks to the party of the Hypocrites and of the Jews at Medina, with the real forces 
of the Muslims. They also knew that the Jews had accepted Muhammad's alliance only from 
motives of temporary expedience and that they would break away from him to join the idolaters 
as soon as the latter showed themselves in the vicinity of Medina. The safety of the state required 
the proscription of the traitors who were secretly giving information to the common enemy. 

About six men were executed for high treason of this nature. 

Madina under Sabotage style attacks on Food, Cattle etc... 

Towards the second year of the hijrah, the idolaters of Mecca began a series of hostile acts against 
the Muslims of Medina. They sent men in parties to commit depredations on the tfuit trees of the 
Muslims of Medina and to carry away their flocks. Now came the moment of severest trial to 
Islam. It became the duty of the Prophet to take serious measures to guard against any plot rising 
from within or a sudden attack from without. 


www.islambasics.com 



Battle of Badr - Makkan Troop formations approaching Madina 


Allah's Prophet put Medina in a state of military diseipline. He had to send frequent 
reconnoitering parties to guard against any sudden onslaught. No sooner did the Prophet organize 
hi state than a large well-equipped army of the Meccans was afield. A force constituting of one 
thousand men marched under Abu Jahl, a great enemy of Islam, towards Medina to attack the 
city. The Muslims received timely notice of their enemies' intention. A body of three hundred 
adherents, of whom two thirds were citizens of Medina, was gathered to forestall the idolaters by 
occupying the valley of Badr, situated near the sea between Mecca and Medina. When the 
Prophet saw the army of the infidels approaching the valley, he prayed that the little band of 
Muslims might not be destroyed. 

Victory - Battle Badr is Won 

The army of the Meccans advanced into the open space which separated the Muslims from the 
idolaters. According to Arab usage, the battle was began by simple combats. The engagement that 
became general. The result of the battle was that the Meccans were driven back with great loss. 
Several of their chiefs were slain, including Abu Jahl. 

Allah's Apostle set rules for treatment of POWs 

A large number of idolaters remained prisoners in the hands of the Muslims. They were, contrary 
to all usage and traditions of the Arabs, treated with the greatest humanity. 

The Prophet gave strict orders that sympathy should be shown to them in their misfortune and 
that they should be treated with kindness. These instructions were faithfully obeyed by the 
Muslims to whose care the prisoners were confided. Dealing with this event. Sir Wilham Muir, in 
his book Life of Muhammad, quotes one of the prisoners saying: "Blessing be on the men of 
Medina; they made us ride, while they themselves walked; they gave us wheaten bread to eat, 
when there was little of it, contenting themselves with dates." 

Almighty Allah said: 

"And Allah has already made you victorious at Badr, when you were a weak little force. So fear 
Allah much (abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which He has forbidden and love Allah 
much, perform all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained) that you may be grateful. 
(Remember) when you (Muhammad) said to the believers, "is it not enough for you that your 
Lord (Allah) should help you with three thousand angels; sent down? Yes, if you hold on to 
patience and piety, and the enemy comes rushing at you; your Lord will help you with five 
thousand angels having marks of distinction. Allah made it not but as a message of good news 
for you and as an assurance to your hearts. And there is no victory except from Allah the All 
Mighty, the All Wise. That He might cut off a part of those who disbelieve, or expose them to 
infamy, so that they retire frustrated." (Ch 3:123-127 Quran). 

The remarkable circumstances, which led to the victory of Badr, and results, which followed from 
it, made a deep impression on the minds of the Muslims; the angels of the heaven had battled on 
their side against their enemies. The division of the spoils created some dissension between the 



Muslim warriors. For the moment, the Prophet divided it equally among all. Subsequently, a 
Qur'an revelation laid down a rule for future division of the spoils. According to this rule, a fifth 
was reserved for the public treasury for the support of the poor and indigent, while the 
distribution of the remaining four fifths was left to the discretion of the Chief of the State. 

Makkan Avenge Loss in Badr - Battle of Uhud 

The next battle between the Quraish and the Muslims was the battle of Uhud, a hill about four 
miles to the north of Medina. The idolaters, to revenge their loss at Badr, made tremendous 
preparations for a new attack upon the Muslims. They collected an army of three thousand strong 
men, of whom seven hundred were armed with coats of mail, and two hundred horses. These 
forces advanced under the conduct of Abu Sufyan and encamped at a village six miles from 
Medina, where they gave themselves up to spoiling the fields and flocks of the Medinites. The 
Prophet, being much inferior to his enemies in number, at first determined to keep himself within 
the town and to receive them there; but afterwards, the advice of some of his companions 
prevailing he marched out against them at the head of one thousand men, of whom one hundred 
were armed with coats of mail; but he had no more than one horse, besides his own, in his whole 
army. With these forces he halted at Mount Uhud. He was soon abandoned by Abdullah Ibn Ubai, 
the leader of the Hypocrites, with three hundred of his followers. Thus, the small force of the 
Prophet was reduced to seven hundred. 

At Mount Uhud the Muslim troops passed the night, and in the morning, after offering their 
prayers, they advanced into the plain. The Prophet contrived to have the hill at his back, and, the 
better to secure his men from being surrounded, he placed fifty archers on the height in the rear, 
behind the troops, and gave them strict orders not to leave their posts whatever might happen. 
When they came to engage, the Prophet had superiority at first. But afterward, his archers left 
their position for the sake of plunder, thus allowing the enemy to attack the Muslims in the fear 
and surround them. The Prophet lost the day and very nearly lost his life. He was struck down by 
a shower of stones and wounded in the face by two arrows, and one of his front teeth was broken. 
Of the Muslims, seventy men were killed, among whom was the Prophet's uncle Hamza. Of the 
infidels, twenty-two men were lost. 

Exhausted Quraish leave Madina victorious 

The Quraish were too exhausted to follow up their advantage, either by attacking Medina or by 
driving the Muslims from the heights of Uhud. They retreated from the Medinite territories after 
barbarously mutilating the corpses of their dead enemies. 

Almighty Allah said; 

"So do not become weak (against your enemy), nor be sad, and you will be superior (in victory) 
if you are indeed (true) believers. If a wound (and killing) has touched you, be sure a similar 
wound (and killing) has touched the others. And so are the days (good and not so good). We give 
to men by turns, that Allah may test those who believe, and that He may take martyrs from 
among you. And Allah likes not the Zalimeen (polytheists and wrongdoers). 

And that Allah may test (or purify) the believers from sins) and destroy the disbeliveers. Do you 
think that you will enter Paradise before Allah tests those of you who fought (in His Cause) and 



(also) tests those who are patient? You did indeed wish for death (Ash-shahadah- martyrdom) 
before you met it. Now you have seen it openly with your own eyes." (Ch 3:139-143 Quran) 

Allah the Exalted also said: 

"We shall cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve, because they joined others in 
worship with Allah for which He has sent no authority; their abode will be the Fire and how evil 
is the abode of the Zalimeen (polytheists and wrong-doers). And Allah did indeed fulfil His 
Promise to you when you were killing them (your enemy) with His Permission; until (the 
moment) you lost your courage and fell to disputing about the order, and disobeyed after He 
showed you (of the booty) which you love. Among you are some that desire this world and some 
that desire the Hereafter. Then He made you flee from them (your enemy), and He might test 
you. But surely. He forgave you, and Allah is most Gracious to the believers. 

And remember when you ran away (dreadfully) without even a casting a side-glance at anyone, 
and the Messenger (Muhammad) was in your rear calling you back. There did Allah give you 
one distress after another by way of requital to teach you not to grieve for that which had 
escaped you, nor that which had befallen you. And Allah is Well Aware of all that you do. 

Then after the distress. He sent down security for you. Slumber overtook a party of you, while 
another party was thinking about themselves (as how to save their ownselves, ignoring the others 
and the Prophet) and thought wrongly of Allah - the thought of ignorance. They said, "Have we 
any part in the affair?" Say you (O Muhammad): "Indeed the affair belongs wholly to Allah." 
They hide within themselves what they dare not reveal to you, saying: "If we had anything to do 
with the affair, none of us would have been killed here." Say: "Even ifyou had remained in your 
homes, those for whom death was decreed would certainly have gone forth to the place of their 
death," but that Allah might test what is in your breasts; and to Mahis (to test, to purify, to get 
rid of that which was in your hearts (sins), and Allah is All Knower of what is in (your) breasts." 
(Ch 3:151-154 Quran). 

Narrated Al-Baraa' Ibn Azib: "The Prophet appointed Abdullah Ibn Jubair as the eommander of 
the infantry men (arehers) who were fifty on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. He instrueted them: 
'Stiek to your plaee, and don't leave it even if you see birds snatehing us, till I send for you; and if 
you see that we have defeated the infidels and made them flee, even then you should not leave 
your plaee till I send for you.' Then the infidels were defeated. By AUah I saw the women fleeing 
lifting up their elothes revealing their leg bangles and their legs. So, the eompanions of Abdullah 
Ibn Jubair said: "The booty! O people, the booty! Your eompanions have beeome vietorious, 
what are you waiting for now?" Abdullah Ibn Jubair said: "Have you forgotten what Allah's 
Messenger said to you?" They replied: "By Allah! We will go to the people (the enemy) and 
eolleet our share from the war booty." But when they went to them, they were foreed to turn baek 
defeated. At that time Allah's Messenger in their rear was ealling them baek. Only twelve men 
remained with the Prophet, and the infidels martyred seventy men from us. 

"The Prophet and his eompanions eaused the Pagans to lose one hundred and forty men, seventy 
of whom were eaptured and seventy were killed. Then Abu Sufyan asked three times: 'Is 
Muhammad present among these people?' The Prophet ordered his eompanions not to answer 
him. Then he asked three times: 'Is Ibn Abu Quhafa present amongst these people?' He asked 
again three times: 'Is Ibn A1 Khattab present among these people?' He then returned to his 
eompanions and said: 'As for these (men), they have been killed.' 'Umar eould not eontrol himself 



and said to Abu Sufyan: ' You told a lie, by Allah! O enemy of AUah! All those you have 
mentioned are alive, and the thing whieh will make you unhappy is still there.' Abu Sufyan said; 
'Our vietory today eompensates for yours in the Battle of Badr, and in war (the vietory) is always 
undeeided and is shared in turns by the belligerents. You will find some of your killed men 
mutilated, but I did not urge my men to do so, yet I do not feel sorry for their deed.' After that he 
started reeiting eheerfully: 'O Hubal, be superior!' On that the Prophet said (to his eompanions): 
'Why don't you answer him baek?' They said; 'O Allah's Messenger! What shall we say?' He said; 
'Say, Allah is Higher and more Sublime.' Then Abu Sufyan said; 'We have the idol of Al-Uzza, and 
you have no TJzza.' The Prophet said (to his eompanions); 'Why don't you answer him baek?' 

They asked; 'O Allah's Messenger! What shall we say?' He said; 'Say Allah is our Helper and you 
have no helper.'" (Sahih A1 Bukhari) 

The moral efieet of this disastrous battle was sueh as to eneourage some neighboring nomad 
tribes to make forays upon the Medinte territories, but most of these were repelled. 

More Mutiny as Charter members cause dissent 

The Jews also were not slow to involve in trouble the Prophet and his followers. They tried to 
ereate disafieetion among his people and slandered him and his adherents. They mispronouneed 
the words of the Qur'an so as to give them an offensive meaning. They also eaused their poets, 
who were superior in eulture and intelligenee, to use their infiuenee to sow sedition among the 
Muslims. One of their distinguished poets, ealled Ka'b, of the Bani An-Nadir, spared no efforts in 
publiely deploring the ill sueeess of the idolaters after their defeet at Badr. 

By his satires against the Prophet and his diseiples, and his elegies on the Meeeans who had fallen 
at Badr, Ka'b sueeeeded in exeiting the Quraish to that Ifenzy of vengeanee whieh broke out at 
Uhud. He then returned to Medina, where he eontinued to attaek the Prophet and the Muslims, 
men and women, in terms of the most obseene eharaeter. Though he belonged to the tribe of Bani 
An Nadir, whieh had entered into the eompaet with the Muslims and pledged itself both for the 
internal and external safety of the State, he openly direeted his aets against the eommonwealth of 
whieh he was a member. 

Another Jew, Sallam by name, of the same tribe, behaved equally fiereely and bitterly against the 
Muslims. He lived with a party of his tribe at Khaibar, a village five days'journey northwest of 
Medina. He made every effort to exeite the neighboring Arab tribes against the Muslims. The 
Muslim eommonwealth with the objeet of seeuring safety among the eommunity, passed a 
sentenee of outlawry upon Ka'b and Sallam. 

The members of another Jewish tribe, namely Bani Qainuqa', were senteneed to expulsion from 
the Medinite territory for having openly and knowingly inlfinged the terms of the eompaet. It was 
neeessary to put an end to their hostile aetions of the sake of maintaining peaee and seeurity. The 
Prophet had to go to their headquarters, where he required them to enter definitively into the 
Muslim eommonwealth by embraeing Islam or to leave Medina. To this they replied in the most 
offensive terms; "You have had a quarrel with men ignorant of the art of war. If you are desirous 
of having any dealings with us, we shall show you that we are men." They then shut themselves 
up in their fortress and set the Prophet and his authority at defianee. The Muslims deeided to 



reduce them and laid siege to their fortress without loss of time. After fifteen days they 
surrendered. Though the Muslims at first intended to inflict some severe punishment on them, 
they contented themselves by banishing the Bani Qainuqa'. 

The Bani An-Nadir had now behaved in the same way as Bani Qainuqa'. The had likewise, 
knowingly and publicly, disregarded the terms of the Charter. The Prophet sent them a message 
similar to that which was sent to their brethren, the Qainuqa'. Then, relying on the assistance of 
the Hypocrites' party, returned for a defiant reply. After a siege of fifteen days, they sued for 
terms. The Muslims renewed their previous offer, and the Jews of An Nadir chose to execute 
Medina. They were allowed to take with them all their movable property, with the exception of 
their arms. Before leaving Medina, they destroyed all their dwellings in immovable property and 
arms which they could not carry away with them were distributed by the Prophet with the consent 
of the Ansar and the Emigrants. A principle was henceforth adopted that any acquisition not made 
in actual warfare should belong to that state and that its disposal should be left to the discretion of 
the ruling authorities. 

Almighty Allah said: (And there is also a share in this booty) for the poor emigrants, who were 
expelled from their homes and their property, seeking Bounties from Allah and to please Him. 
And helping Allah (helping His Religion) and His Messenger (Muhammad). Such are indeed the 
truthful (to what we say); and those who, before them, had homes (in Al Madina) and had 
adopted the Faith, love, those who emigrate to them, and have no jealousy in their breasts for 
that which they have been given (from the booty of Bani An Nadir), and give them (emigrants) 
preference over themselves, even though they were in need of that. And whosoever is saved from 
his own covetousness, such are they who will be the successful. " (Ch 59:8-9 Quran) 

The expulsion of the Bani An-Nadir took place in the fourth year of the hijrah. The remaining 
portion of this year and the early part of the next were passed in repressing the hostile attempts of 
the nomadic tribes against the Muslims and inflicting punishment for various murderous forays on 
the Medinite territories. Of this nature was the expedition against the Christian Arabs of Dumat Al 
Jandal (a place about seven days'journey to the south of Damascus), who had stopped the 
Medinites traffic with Syria and even threatened a raid upon Medina. These marauders, however, 
fled on the approach of the Muslims, and the Prophet returned to Medina after concluding a treaty 
with a neighboring chief, to whom he granted permission of pasturage in the Medinite territories. 

Enemy's Army (headed by Abu Sufyan) march towards Madina 

In the same year, the enemies of Islam made every possible attempt to stir up the tribes against the 
Muslims. The Jews also took an active, if hidden, part in those intrigues. An army often thousand 
well-equipped men, marched towards Medina under the command of Abu Sufyan. They 
encamped near Mount Uhud, a few miles from the city. The Muslims could gather only an army 
of three thousand men. Seeing their inferiority in numbers on the one hand, and the turbulence of 
the Hypocrites within the town on the other, they preferred to remain on the defensive. They dug 
a deep moat round the unprotected quarters of Medina and encamped outside the city with a 
trench in front of them. They relied for safety of the other side upon their allies, the Quaraiza, 
who possessed several fortresses at a short distance towards the south and were bound by the 
compact to assist the Muslim s against any raiders. These Jews, however, were induced by the 



idolaters to violate their pledge and to join the Quraish. As these Jews were aequainted with the 
Hypoerites within the walls of the eity were waiting for an opportunity to play their part, the 
situation of the Muslims was most dangerous. 

The siege had already lasted for twenty days. The enemy made great efforts to eross the treneh, 
but every attempt was fiereely repulsed by the small Muslim foree. Disunion was now rife in the 
midst of the besieging army. Their horses were perishing fast, and provisions were beeoming less 
every day. During the night, a storm of wind and rain eaused their tents to be overthrown and 
their lights extinguished. Abu Sufyan and the majority of his army fled, and the rest took refuge 
with the Quraiza. The Muslims, though they were satisfied with the failure of their enemies, eould 
not help thinking that the vietory was unsatisfaetory so long as the Quraiza, who had violated 
their sworn pledge, remained so near. The Jews might at any time surprise Medina from their side. 
The Muslims felt it their duty to demand an explanation of the violation of the pledge. This was 
utterly refused. Consequently, the Jews were besieged and eompelled to surrender at diseretion. 
They only asked that their punishment should be left to the judgment of Sa'd Ibn Mu'adh, the 
prinee of the tribe of Aws. This ehief, who was a fieree soldier, had been wounded in the attaek, 
and, indeed, died of his wounds the following day. Infuriated by the treaeherous eonduet of the 
Bani Quraiza, he gave judgment that the fighting men should be to death and that the women and 
ehildren should beeome the slaves of the Muslims. The sentenee was earried into exeeution. 

The Prophet protects the Christians of Madina 

It was about this time that the Prophet granted to the monks of the Monastry of St. Catherine, 
near Mount Sinai, his liberal eharter by whieh they seeured for the Christians noble and generous 
privileges and immunities. He undertook himself and enjoined his followers, to proteet the 
Christians, to defend their ehurehes and the residenees of their priests and to guard them from all 
injuries. They were not to be unfairly taxed; no bishop was to be driven out of his dioeese; nor 
Christian was to be foreed to rejeet his rehgion; no monk was to be expelled from his Monastry; 
no pilgrim was to be stopped from his pilgrimage; nor were the Christian ehurehes to be pulled 
down for the sake of building mosques or houses for the Muslims. Christian women married to 
Muslims were to enjoy their own religion and not to be subjeeted to eompulsion or annoyanee of 
any kind. If the Christians should stand in need of assistanee for the repair of their ehurehes or 
monasteries, or any other matter pertaining to their religion, the Muslims were to assist them. This 
was not to be eonsidered as supporting their religion, but as simply rendering them assistanee in 
speeial eireumstanees. Should the Muslims be engaged in hostilities with outside Christians, no 
Christian resident among the Muslims should be treated with eontempt on aeeount of his ereed. 
The Prophet deelared that any Muslim violating any elause of the eharter should be regarded as a 
transgressor of Allah's eommandments, a violator of His testament and negleetful of His faith. 

The Treaty of Hudaibiya 

Six years had already elapsed sinee the Prophet and his Meeean followers had fled from their 
birthplaee. Their hearts began to yearn for their homes and for their Saered House the Ka'ba. As 
the season of the pilgrimage approaehed, the Prophet announeed his intention to visit the holy 
eenter, and numerous voiees of his diseiples responded to the eall. Preparations were soon made 
for the journey to Meeea. The Prophet, aeeompanied by seven or eight hundred Muslims, 



Emigrants and Ansars, all totally unarmed, set out on the pilgrimage. The Quraish, who were still 
full of animosity towards the Muslims, gathered a large army to prevent them from entering 
Meeea and maltreated the envoy whom the Prophet had sent to ask permission to visit the holy 
plaees. After mueh dilSeulty, a treaty was eoneluded by whieh it was agreed that all hostilities 
should eease for ten years; that anyone eoming from the Quraish to the Prophet without the 
permission of the guardian or ehief should be given baek to the idolaters; that any Muslim persons 
going over to the Meeeans should not be surrendered; that any tribe desirous of entering into 
allianee, either with the Quraish or with the Muslims, should be at liberty to do so without 
disputes; that the Muslims should go baek to Medina on the present oeeasion and stop advaneing 
further; that they should be permitted in the following year to visit Meeea and to remain there for 
three days with the arms they used on journeys, namely, their seimitars in sheaths. 

The Treaty of Hudaibiya thus ended, the Prophet returned with his people to Medina. 

Prophet Muhammad dispatches envoys 

About this time it was revealed to the Prophet that his mission should be universal. He dispatehed 
several envoys to invite the neighboring sovereigns to Islam. The embassy to the king of Persia, 
Chosroes Parvis, was reeeived with disdain and eontumely. He was haughtily amazed at the 
boldness of the Meeea fugitive in addressing him on terms of equality. He was so enraged that he 
tore up into pieees the Prophet's letter of invitation to Islam and dismissed the envoy from his 
presenee with great eontempt. When the Prophet reeeived information on this treatment, he 
eahnly observed: "Thus will the Empire of Chosroes be torn to pieees." 

Heraclius submits to Almighty God and embraces Islam 

The embassy to Heraelitus, the Emperor of the Romans, was reeeived mueh more politely and 
reverentially. He treated the ambassador with great respeet and sent the Prophet a graeious reply 
to his message. 

Another envoy was sent to an Arab priee of the Ghassanite tribe, a Christian feudatory of 
Heraelius. This prinee, instead of reeeiving the envoy with any respeet, eruelly murdered him. This 
aet eaused great eonsternation among the Muslims, who eonsidered it as an outrage of 
international obligations. 

Narrated Abdullah Ibn Abbas: Abu Sufyan Ibn Harb informed me that Heraelius had sent a 
messenger to him while he had been aeeompanying a earavan from Quraish. They were merehants 
doing business in Sham (Syria, Palestine, Eebanon, and Jordan) at the time when Allah's 
Messenger had a truee with Abu Sufyan and Quraish infidels. So Abu Sufyan and his eompanions 
went to Heraelius at Ilya (Jerusalem). 

Heraelitus ealled them in the eourt and he had all the senior Roman dignitaries around him. He 
ealled for his translator who, translating Heraelius's question, said to them: "Who among you is 
elosely related to that man who elaims to be a Prophet?" Abu Sufyan replied: "I am the nearest 
relative to him (amongst the group)." 

Heraelius said: "Bring him (Abu Sufyan) elose to me and make his eompanions stand behind him." 
Abu Sufyan added: "Heraelius told his translator to tell my eompanions that he wanted to put 
some questions to me regarding that man (The Prophet) and if I told a he they (my eompanions) 
should eontradiet me. By Allah! Had I not been afraid of my eompanions labeling me a liar, I 
would have not have spoken the truth about the Prophet." Abu Sufyan's narration eontinues: 



"The first question he asked me about him was; 

What is his family status among you?" 

"I replied: "He belongs to a good noble family amongst us." 

Heraclius further asked: "Has anybody among you ever claimed the same (to be a Prophet) before 
him?" 

I replied: "No." 

He said: "Was anybody amongst his ancestors a king?" 

I replied: "No." 

Heraclius asked: "Do the nobles or the poor follow him?" 

I replied: "It is the poor who follow him." 

He said: "Are his followers increasing or decreasing (day by day)?" 

I replied: "They are increasing." 

He then asked: "Does anybody amongst those who embrace his religion become displeased and 
renounce the religion afterwards?" 

I replied: "No." 

Heraclius said: "Have you ever accused him of telling lies before his claim (to be a Prophet)?" 

I replied: "No." 

Hereaclius said: "Does he break his promises?" 

I replied: "No. We are at truce with him but we do not know what he will do in it." I could not 
find opportunity to say anything against him except that. 

Heraclius asked: "Have you ever had a war with him?" 

I replied: "Yes." 

Then he said: "What was the outcome of the battles?" 

I replied: "Sometimes he was victorious and sometimes we." 

Heraclius said: "What does he order you to do?" 



I said: "He tells us to worship Allah and Allah alone and not to worship anything along with Him, 
and to renounee all that our ancestors had said. He orders us to pray, to speak the truth, to be 
chaste and to keep good relations with our kith and kin." 

Heraclius asked the translator to convey to me the following: "I asked you about his family and 
your reply was that he belonged to a very noble family. In fact, all the Messengers come from 
noble families among their respective peoples. I questioned you whether anybody else among you 
claimed such a thing; your reply was in the negative. If the answer had been in the affirmative, I 
would have thought that this man was following the previous man's statement. Then I asked you 
whether anyone of his ancestors was a king. Your reply was in the negative, and if it had been in 
the affirmative, I would have thought that this man wanted to take back his ancestral kingdom. I 
further asked whether he was ever accused of telling lies before he said what he said and your 
reply was in the negative. So I wondered how a person who does not tell a lie about others could 
ever tell a lie about Allah. I then asked you whether the rich people followed him or the poor. 

You replied that it was the poor who followed him. And, in fact, all the Messengers have been 
followed by this very class of people. Then I asked you whether his followers were increasing or 
decreasing. You replied that they were increasing, and, in fact, this is the way of true faith, till it is 
complete in all respects. I further asked you whether there was anybody, who, after embracing his 
religion, became displeased and discarded his religion. You reply was in the negative, and, in fact 
thi s is (the sign of) true faith, when its delight enters the hearts and mixes with them completely. I 
asked you whether he had ever betrayed. You replied in the negative, and likewise the Messengers 
never betray. Then I asked you what he ordered you to do. You replied that he ordered you to 
worship Allah and Allah alone and not to worship anything along with Him, and forbade you to 
worship idols, and ordered you to pray, to speak the truth and to be chaste. If what you have said 
is true, he will very soon occupy this place underneath my feet and I knew it (from the scriptures) 
that he was going to appear but I did not know that he would be from you, and if I could reach 
him definitely, I would go immediately to meet him and if I were with him, I would certainly wash 
his feet." 

Heraclius then asked for the letter addressed by Allah's Messenger which had been delivered by 
Dihya to the Governor of Busra, who forwarded it to Herachus to read. The contents of the letter 
were as follows: "In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. (This letter is) from 
Muhammad, the slave of Allah and His Messenger to Heraclius the ruler of Byzantine. Peace be 
upon him who follows the right path. Furthermore, I invite you to Islam, and if you become a 
Muslim you will be safe, and AUah will double your reward, and if you reject this invitation of 
Islam, you will be committing a sin by misguiding your subjects. 

And I recite to you AUah's Statement: SA Y (O Muhammad): 'O People of the Scripture (Jews & 
Christians): Come to a word that is just between us and you, that we worship none but AUah, and 
that we associate no partners with Him and that none of us shall take others as lords besides 
AUah.' Then, if they turn away, say: 'Bear witness that we are Muslims.' " 

Abu Sufyan then added: When Heraclius had finished his speech and had read the letter, there was 
a great hue and cry in the Royal Court. So we turned out of the court. I told my companions that 
the question of Ibn-Abi-Kabsha (the Prophet Muhammad) had become so prominent that even the 
King of Bani Al-Asfar (Byzantine) was afraid of him. Then I started to become sure that he (the 



Prophet) would be the eonqueror in the near future till I embraeed Islam (Allah guided me to it). 
The sub narrator added that Ibn An-Natur was the Governor of Ilya (Jerusalem) and Heraehus 
was the head of the Christians of Sham. Ibn An-Natur narrated that onee while Heraehus was 
visiting Ilya (Jerusalem), he got up in the morning with a sad mood. Some of his priests asked him 
why he as in that mood. Hreaelius was a foreteller and an astrologer. He replied: "At night when I 
looked at the stars, I saw that the leader of those who praetiee eireumeision had appeared 
(beeome the eonqueror). Who are they who praetiee eireumeision?" The people replied: "Exeept 
the Jews, nobody praetiees eireumeision, so you should not be afraid of them (Jews). Just Issue 
orders to kill every Jew present in the eountry.' 

While they were discussing it, a messenger sent by the king of Ghassan to convey the news of 
Allah's Messenger to Heraehus was brought in. Having heard the news, he (Heraehus) ordered the 
people to go and see whether the messenger of Ghassan was circumcised. The people, after seeing 
him, told Heraehus that he was circumcised. Heraehus then asked him about the Arabs. The 
messenger replied: "Arabs also practice circumcision." 

After hearing that Heraehus remarked that sovereignty of the Arabs had appeared. Heraehus then 
wrote a letter to his friend in Rome who was as good as Heraehus in knowledge. Heraehus then 
left for Homs (a town in Syria) and stayed there till he received the reply of his letter from his 
friend, who agreed with him in his opinion about the emergence of the Prophet and the fact that 
he was a Prophet. On that, Heraehus invited all the heads of the Byzantines to assemble in his 
palace at Homs. When they assembled, he ordered that all the doors of his palace be closed. Then 
he came out and said: "O Byzantines! If success is your desire and if you seek right guidance and 
want your empire to remain, then give a pledge of allegiance to this Prophet (embrace Islam)." 

(on hearing the views of Heraehus) the people ran towards the gates of the palace like onagers but 
found the doors closed. Heraehus realized their hatred towards Islam and when he lost the hope 
of their embracing Islam, he ordered that they should be brought back in audience. 

(When they returned) he said: "What was already said was just to test the strength of your 
conviction and I have seen it." The people prostrated before him and became pleased with him, 
and this was the end of Heraclius's story (in connection with his faith). (Sahih Al-Bukhari) 

Attack from the Jews of Khaibar thwarted 

In the same year the Jews of Khaibar, a strongly fortified territory at a distance of four days' 
journey from Medina, showed implacable hatred towards the Muslims. United by alliance with the 
tribe of Ghatfan, as well as with other cognate tribes, the Jews of Khaibar made serious attempts 
to for ma coalition against the Muslims. The Prophet and his adherents were apprised of this 
movement and immediate measures were taken in order to repress any new attack upon Medina. 
An expedition of fourteen hundred men was soon prepared to march against Khaibar. The allies of 
the Jews left them to face the war with the Muslims all alone. The Jews firmly resisted the attacks 
of the Muslims, but eventually all their fortress had to be surrendered, one after the other to their 
enemies. They prayed for forgiveness, which was accorded to them on certain conditions. Their 
lands and immovable property were secured to them, together with the free practice of their 
rehgion. After subduing Khaibar, the Muslims returned to Medina in safety. 


www.islambasics.com 



Allah’s Messenger and the Muslims perfom Hajj 


Before the end of the year, it being the seventh year of the hijrah, the Prophet and his adherents 
availed themselves of their armistiee with the Quraish to visit the holy Ka'ba. The Prophet, 
aeeompanied by two hundred Muslims, went to Meeea to perform the rites of pilgrimage. On this 
oeeasion the Quraish evaeuated the eity during the three days whieh the eeremonies lasted. 

Sir William Muir, in his book. Life of Mohammed Vol. Ill eomments on the ineident as follows: 

It was surely a strange sight, whieh at this time presented itself at the vale of Meeea, a sight 
unique in the history of the world. The aneient eity is for three days evacuated by all its 
inhabitants, high and low, every house deserted, and as they retire, the exiled converts, many 
years banished from their birth-place, approach in a great body accompanied by their allies, revisit 
the empty homes of their childhood, and within the short allotted space, fulfil the rites of 
pilgrimage. The outside inhabitants, climbing the heights around take refuge under tents or other 
shelter among the hills and glens; and clustering on the overhanging peak of Abu Qubeis, thence 
watch the movements of the visitors beneath, as with the Prophet at their head, they make the 
circuit of the Ka'ba and rapid procession between Essafa and Marwah, and anxiously scan every 
figure, if perchance they may recognize among the worshippers some long lost friend or relative. 

It was a scene rendered only by the throes, which gave birth to Islam. 

In accordance with the terms of the treaty, the Muslims left Mecca at the end of three day's visit. 
This peaceful visit was followed by important conversions among the Quraish. Khalid Ibn 
Al-Walid, known as the Sword of Allah, who, before this, had been a bitter enemy of Islam and 
who commanded the Quraish cavalry at Uhud; and Amr Ibn Al' As, another important character 
and warrior, adopted the new faith. 

Retribution for the Murder of the Muslim Envoy 

When the Prophet and his followers returned to Medina, they arranged in expedition to exact 
retribution from the Ghassanite prince who had killed the Muslim envoy. A force of three 
thousand men, under the Prophet's adopted son Zaid, was sent to take reparation from the 
offending tribe. 

Khalid Ibn Al-Walid was one of the generals chosen for the expedition. When they reached the 
neighborhood of Muta, a village to the southeast of the Dead Sea, they met with an overwhelming 
force of Arabs and Romans who were assembled to oppose them. The Muslims, however, 
resolved resolutely to push forward. Their courage was of no avail and they suffered great losses. 
In this battle Zaid and Ja'far, a cousin of the Prophet, and several other notables were killed. 
Khalid Ibn Al-Walid, by a series of maneuvers, succeeded in drawing off the army and conducting 
it without further loses to Medina. A month later, however, Amr Ibn Al-' As marched unopposed 
through the lands of the hostile tribes, received their submission, and restored the prestige of 
Islam on the Syrian frontier. 

Quraish violate terms of Hudaibiya, Prophets army march agaiust Idolaters 

About the end of the seventh year of the hijrah, the Quraish and their allies, the Bani Bakr, 
violated the terms of the peace concluded at Hudaibiya by attacking the Bani Khuzaah, who were 



in alliance with the Muslims. The Bani Khuzzah appealed to the Prophet for help and proteetion. 
The Prophet determined to make a stop to the reign of injustiee and oppression, whieh had lasted 
so long at Meeca. He immediately gathered ten thousand men to mareh against the idolaters and 
set out on January, 630. 

After eight days the Muslims army halted, and alighted at Marr Az-Zahran, a day's journey from 
Meeea. On the night of their arrival, Abu Sufyan, who was delegated by the Quraish to ask the 
Prophet to abandon his projeet, presented himself and besought an interview. In the morning it 
was granted. "Has the time not come, O Abu Sufyan," said the Prophet, "for you to aeknowledge 
that there is no deity save Allah and that I am His Messenger?" Abu Sufyan, after hesitating for 
awhile, pronouneed the preseribed formula of belief and adopted Islam. He was then sent baek to 
prepare the eity for the Prophet's approaeh. 

With the exeeption of a slight resistanee by eertain elans headed by Ikrima and Safwan, in whieh 
many Muslims were killed, the Prophet entered Mecea almost unopposed. The eity whieh had 
treated him so eruelly, driven him and his faithful band for refuge among strangers, the eity whieh 
had sworn his life and the lives of his devoted adherents, now lay at his merey. His old perseeutors 
were now eompletely at his feet. The Prophet entered Meeea on his favorite eamel A1 Kaswa, 
having Usama Ibn Zaid sitting behind him. On his way he reeited Surah A1 Path (Vietory), the first 
verses of whieh maybe interpreted thus: 

"Verily! We have given you (O Muhammad) a manifest victory. That Allah may forgive you your 
sins of the past and future, and complete His Favor on you, and guide you on the Straight Path; 
and that Allah may help you with strong help. (Ch 48:1-3 Quran) 

Prophet Muhammad (saw) orders the destruction of the idols 

The Muslim army entered the eity unpretentiously and peaeefully. No house was robbed, no man 
or woman was insulted. The Prophet granted a general amnesty to the entire population of 
Meeea. Only four eriminals, whom justiee eondemned, were proseribed. He did however, order 
the destruetion of all idols and pagan images of worship, upon whieh three hundred and fifty idols 
whieh were in the Saered House of Ka'ba were thrown down. The Prophet himself destroyed a 
wooden pigeon hung from the roof and regarded as one of the deities of the Quraish. During the 
downfall of the images and idols he was heard to ery aloud: "Allah is great. Truth has eome and 
falsehood has vanished; verily falsehood is fleeting." The old idolaters observed thoughtfully the 
destruetion of their gods, whieh were utterly powerless. After the Prophet had abolished these 
pagan idols and every pagan rite, he delivered a sermon to the assembled people. He dwelt upon 
the natural brotherhood of man in the words of the Qur'an: 

"O Mankind! We have created you for a male and a female, and made you into nations and 
tribes, that you may know one another. Verily, the most honorable of you in the Sight of Allah is 
that (believer) who has At-Taqwa (one of the Muttaqun, pious, and righteous persons who fear 
Allah much, abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which He has forbidden), and love 
Allah much (perform all kinds of good deeds which He has ordained.) Verily Allah is 
All-Knowing, All-Aware. (Ch 49:13 Quran) 



Narrated Hisham's father: When Allah's Messenger set out (towards Meeea) during the year of the 
Conquest (of Meeea) and this news reaehed (the infidels of Quraish), Abu Sufyan, Hakim Ibn 
Hizam and Budail Ibn Waraqa eame out to gather information about Allah's Messenger. They 
proeeeded on their way till they reaehed a plaee ealled Marr-az-Zahran (whieh is near Meeea). 
Behold! There they saw many fires as if they were the fires of Arafat." Budail Ibn Waraqa' said: 
"Banu' Amr are less in number than that." Some of the guards of Allah's Messenger saw them and 
took them over, eaught them, and bthem to Allah's Messenger. Abu Sufyan embraeed Islam. 

When the Prophet proeeeded, he said to Al' Abbas: "Keep Abu Sufyan standing at the top of the 
mountain so that he would look at the Muslims. SO Al- Abbas kept him standing (at that plaee) 
and the tribes with the Prophet started passing in front of Abu Sufyan in military batehes. A bateh 
passed in front of Abu Sufyan and said: "O 'Abbas who are these?" 'Abbas said: "They are Banu 
Ghaifar." Abu Sufyan said: "I have got nothing to do with Ghifar." Then a bateh of the tribe of 
Juhaina passed by and he said similarly as above. Then a bateh of the tribe of Sa'd Ibn Huzaim 
passed by and he said similarly as above. Then eame a bateh, the like of whieh Abu Sufyan had 
not seen. He said: "Who are these?" Abbas said: "They are the Ans ar headed by Sa'd Ibn 'Ubada, 
the one holding the flag." Sa'd Ibn 'Ubada said: "O Abu Sufyan! Today is the day of a great battle 
and today (what is prohibited in )the Ka'ba will be permissible." Abu Sufyan said, "O Abbas! How 
exeellent the day of destruetion is!" Then eame another bateh of warriors whieh was the smallest 
of all the batehes, and in it there was Allah's Messenger and his eompanions, and the flag of the 
Prophet was earried by Az-Zubair Ibn Al-Awwam. When Allah's Messenger passed by Abu 
Sufyan, the latter said to the Prophet: "Do you know what Sa'd Ibn Ubada said?" The Prophet 
said: "What did he say?" Abu Sufyan said: "He said so-and-so." The Prophet said: "Sa'd told a lie, 
but today Allah will give superiority to the Ka'ba and today the Ka'ba will be eovered with a eloth 
eovering." Allah's Messenger ordered that his flag be fixed at Al-Hajun. 

Narrated Urwa: Nafi' Ibn Jubair Ibn Mut'im said: "I heard Al-Abbas saying to Az-Zubair Ibn Al- 
Awwam, 'O Abu Abdullah! Did Allah's Messenger order you to fix the flag here?' "Allah's 
Messenger ordered Khalid Ibn Al-Walid to enter Meeea from its upper part from Kadaa' while the 
Prophet himself entered from Kudaa. Two men from the eavahy of Khalid Ibn Al-Walid named 
Hubaish Ibn Al Ashar and Kurz Ibn Jabir Al-Fihri were martyred on that day. (Sahih Al Bukhari) 
Now great multitudes eame to adopt Islam and take the oath of allegianee to the Prophet. For this 
purpose an assembly was held at As-Safa Mountain. Umar, aeting as the Prophet's deputy 
administered the oath, whereby the people bound themselves not to adore any deity but Allah to 
obey the Prophet to abstain from theft, adultery, infantieide, lying and baekbiting. Thus was 
fulfrlled the propheey embodied in the Surah Al Fath in the Quran. 

During his stay at Meeea, the Prophet dispatehed his prineipal diseiples in every direetion to 
preaeh Islam among the wild tribes of the desert and eall them to the true religion of Allah. He 
sent small detaehments of his troops into the suburbs who destroyed the temples of Al Uzza, 
Suwaa, and Manat, the three famous idols in the temples of the neighboring tribes. The Prophet 
gave striet orders that these expeditions should be earried out in a peaeeable manner. These 
injunetions were obeyed in all eases, with one exeeption. The troops under Khalid Ibn Al-Walid, 
the fieree newly-eonverted warrior, killed a few of the Bani Jazima. When the news of this wanton 
bloodshed reaehed the Prophet, he was deeply grieved and exelaimed: "Oh, my Lord, I am 
innoeent of what Khalid has done." He dispatehed a large sum of money for the widows and 
orphans of the slain and severely rebuked Khalid. 



At this time the tribes of Hawazin and Thakif showed unwillingness to render obedienee to the 
Muslims without resistanee. They formed a league with the intention of attaeking the Prophet, but 
he was vigilant enough to frustrate their plan. A big battle was fought with this new enemy of 
Islam near Hunain, a deep and narrow defile nine miles northeast of Meeea. The idolaters were 
utterly defeated. One body of the enemy, eonsisting ehiefiy of the Thakif tribe, took refuge in their 
fortified eity of Ta'if, whieh eight or nine years before had dismissed the Prophet from within its 
walls with injuries and insults. The remainder of the defeated foree, eonsisting prineipally of the 
Hawazin, sought at a eamp in the valley of Autas. This eamp was raided by the Muslim troops. 
The families of the Hawazin, their fioeks and herds with all their other efieets, were eaptured by 
the troops of the Prophet. Ta'if was then besieged for a few days only, after whieh the Prophet 
raised the siege, well knowing that the people of Ta'if would soon be foreed by eireumstanees to 
submit without bloodshed. Returning to his eamp where the prisoners of Hawazin were left safely, 
the Prophet found a deputation from this hostile tribe who begged him to set free their families. 
The Prophet replied that he was willing to give baek his own share of those eaptives and that of 
the ehildren of Abdul Muttalib, but that he eould not foree his followers to abandon the Ifuits of 
their vietory. The diseiples followed the generous example of their teaeher. The hearts of several 
members of the Thakir tribe were so infiueneed by this that they offered their allegianee and soon 
beeame earnest Muslims. The Prophet now returned to Medina fully satisfied with the 
aehievements of his mission. 

The ninth year of the hijrah is known as the Year of Embassies, as being the year in whieh the 
various tribes of Arabia submitted to the elaim of the Prophet and sent embassies to render 
homage to him. 

These tribes had been awaiting the issue of the war between Muhammad and the Quraish; but as 
soon as the tribe - the prineipal of the whole nation and the deseendants of Ishmael, whose 
prerogatives none offered to dispute - had submitted, they were satisfied that it was not in their 
power to oppose Muhammad. Henee their embassies fioeked into Medina to make their 
submission to him. The eonquest of Meeea deeided the fate of idolatry in Arabia. Now 
deputations began to arrive from all sides to render the adherenee to Islam of various tribes. 
Among the rest, five princes of the tribe of Himyar professed Islam and sent ambassadors to 
notify Muhammad of the same. These were the princes of Yemen, Mahra, Oman, and Yamama. 
The idolaters of Ta'if, the very people who had driven the Messenger of Islam from their midst 
with violence and contempt, now sent a deputation to pray forgiveness and ask to be numbered 
among his followers. They begged, however, for temporary preservation of their idols. As a last 
appeal they begged for one month of grace only. But even this was not conceded. The Prophet 
said Islam and the idols could not exist together. They then begged for exemption from the daily 
prayers. The Prophet replied that without devotion, religion would be nothing. At last they 
submitted to all that was required of them. They, however, asked to be exempted from destroying 
the idols with their own hands. This was granted. The Prophet selected Abu Sufyan and Mughira 
to destroy the idols of Ta'if, the chief of which was the notorious idol of Al-Lat. This was carried 
out amidst cries of despair and grief from the women of Ta'if 

The conversion of this tribe of Ta'if is worthy of notice. This tribe, which hither to had proved 
hostile to the new faith, was noted among the Arabs for its idolatrous priesthood. A small 
detachment under Ali was sent to reduce them to obedience and to destroy their idols. The prince 



of the tribe was 'Adi, the son of the famous Hatim, whose generosity was spoken of all over 
Arabia. On the approaeh of the Muslim foree, Adi fled to Syria, leaving his sister with his 
prineipal elansmen, to fall into the hands of the Muslims. These were eondueted by Ali with every 
sign of respeet and sympathy to Medina. When the daughter of Hatim eame before the Prophet, 
she addressed him in the following words: "Messenger of Allah, my father is dead; my brother, my 
only relation fled into the mountains on the approaeh of the Muslims. I eannot ransom myself; I 
eount on your generosity for my deliveranee. My father was an illustrious man, the prinee of his 
tribe, a man who ransomed prisoners, proteeted the honor of women, fed the poor, eothe 
aflflioted, and was deaf to no appeal." The Prophet replied: "Your father had the virtues of a true 
Muslim; if it were permitted to invoke the merey of Allah on any whose life was passed in 
idolatry, I would pray to Allah for merey for the soul of Hatim." Then, addressing the Muslims 
around him, he said: "the daughter of Hatim is free, her father was a generous and humane man; 
Allah loves and rewards the mereiful." With the daughter of Hatim, all her people were set at 
liberty. She proeeeded to Syria and related to her brother the generosity of Muhammad. 'Adi, 
touehed by gratitude, hastened to Medina, where he was kindly reeeived by the Prophet. He 
professed Islam and returned to his people and persuaded them to abandon idolatry. They all 
submitted and beeame devoted Muslims. 

Hitherto no prohibition had been enforeed against idolaters entering the Holy Ka'ba, or 
performing their abominable rites within the saered preeinets. Towards the end of the ninth year 
of the hijrah, during the month of pilgrimage 'Ali was delegated by the Prophet to read a 
proelamation that ran as follows: "No idolater shall after this year perform the pilgrimage; no one 
shall make the eireuit of the Ka'ba naked (sueh a disgraeeful eustom was praetieed by the pagan 
Arabs); and treaty with the Prophet shall eontinue in foree but four months are allowed to every 
man to return to his territories; after that there will be no obligation on the Prophet, exeept 
towards those with whom treaties have been eoneluded." 

The vast multitude who had listened to the above deelaration returned to their homes, and before 
the following year was over the majority of them were Muslims. 

During the tenth year of the hijrah, as in the preeeding one, numerous embassies eontinued to 
pour into Medina from all parts of Arabia, to testily to the allegianee of their ehiefs and their 
tribes. Teaehers were sent by the Prophet into the different provinees to teaeh the new eonverts 
the prineiples and preeepts of Islam. These teaehers were invariably given the following 
injunetions when they were about to depart on their mission: "Deal gently with the people, and be 
not harsh; eheer them, and do not look down upon them with eontempt. You will meet with many 
believers in the Holy Seriptures, who will ask you: 'What is the key to heaven?' Ans wer them it 
(the key to heaven) is to bear witness to the divine truth and to do good." 

Thus, the mission of the Prophet Muhammad was now aeeomplished; the whole work was 
aehieved in his lifetime. Idolatry with its nameless abominations was entirely destroyed. The 
people who were sunk in superstition, eruelty, and viee in regions where spiritual life was utterly 
unknown were now united in one bond of faith, hope and eharity. The tribes whieh had been from 
time immemorial engaged in perpetual wars were now united together by the ties of brotherhood, 
love, and harmony. Heneeforth, their aims were not eonfined to this earth alone; but there was 
something beyond the grave - mueh higher, purer, and diviner - ealling them to the praetiee of 
eharity, goodness, justiee, and universal love. They eould now pereeive that Allah was not that 



which they had carved out of wood or stone, but the Almighty Loving, Merciful, the Creator of 
the Universe. 


Prophet Muhammad's last Sermon, mount Arafat 

On the return of the sacred month of pilgrimage, the Prophet, under the presentiment of his 
approaching end, determined to make a farewell pilgrimage to Mecca. In February 632, he left 
Medina with a very considerable concourse of Muslims. It is stated that from ninety thousand to 
one hundred and forty thousand people accompanied the Prophet. Before completing all rites of 
the pilgrimage, he addressed the assembled multitude from the top of Mount Arafat in the 
following words; 

"O people! Listen to my words, for I know not whether another year will be vouchsafed to me 
after this year to find myself among you. Your lives and property are sacred and inviolable among 
one another until you appear before the Lord, as this day and this month are sacred for all; and 
remember, you will have to appear before your Lord Who will demand from you an account for 
all your actions. O people, you have rights over your wives, and your wives have a right over you. 
Verily you have taken them on the security of Allah and have made their people lawful unto you 
by the words of Allah. And your slaves, see that you feed them with such food as you eat 
yourselves, and clothe them with the stuff you wear, and if they commit a fault which you are not 
inclined to forgive, then part with them; for they are the servants of the Lord and are not to be 
harshly treated. O people, listen to my words and understand them. Know that all Muslims are 
brothers. You are one brotherhood; but no man shall take ought from his brother, unless by his 
free consent. Keep yourselves from injustice. Let him who is present tell this to him who is absent. 
It maybe that he who is told this afterward may remember better than he who has now heard it. 
The Prophet concluded his sermon by exclaiming; "O Lord, I have fulfilled my message and 
accomplished my work." The assembled multitude, all in one voice, cried; "Yea, verily you have." 
The Prophet again exclaimed; "O Lord, I beseech You, bear witness to it." 

Prophet returns to Madina 

Having rigorously performed all the ceremonies of the pilgrimage, that his example might be 
followed by all Muslims for all succeeding ages, the Prophet returned with his followers to 
Medina. 

The eleventh year of the hijrah, being the last year of Muhammad's life, was spent at Medina. 
There he settled the organization of the provincial and tribal communities which had adopted 
Islam and become the component parts of the Muslims federation. More officers had to be 
deputed to the interior provinces for the purpose of teaching their inhabitants the precepts of the 
religion, administering justice, and collecting Zakat. Muadh Ibn Jabal was sent to Yemen. On his 
departure to that distant province the Prophet enjoined him to use his own discretion in the event 
of his being unable to find express authority in the Quran. Ah was deputed to Yamama in the 
southeast of the peninsula. To him the Prophet said; "Never decide between any two parties who 
come to you for justice unless you first hear both of them." 


www.islambasics.com 



Murders and false claims of Prophethood arise 


A force was being prepared under Usama Ibn Zaid, whose father was killed at Muta, against the 
Byzantines, to exaet the long-delayed reparation for the murder of the envoy to Syria. However, 
the news of the Prophet's siekness and failing health eaused that expedition to be stopped. This 
news was soon noised abroad and produeed disorder in some distriets. Three pretenders had 
arisen who gave themselves out as prophets and tried by all kinds of imposture to win over their 
tribes. The most dangerous of these pretenders was known as A1 Aswad. He was a ehief of 
Yemen and a eonjurer. He soon sueeeeded in gaining over his tribesmen and, with the help, 
redueed to subjeetion many of the neighboring towns. He killed Shahr, whom the Prophet had 
appointed as Governor of Sana in the plaee of his father Bazan, who had just died. Bazan had 
been the vieeroy of Yemen under Chosroes of Persia; after he had adopted Islam he was allowed 
by the Prophet to remain as Governor of Yemen. He was able to convert to Islam all the Persian 
eolony in that provinee. Al-Aswad, the eonjurer, had now killed Shahr, but soon after he was 
massaered by the Persians of Yemen. 

The other two pretenders, Tulayha and Haroun by name, were not suppressed until after the death 
of the Prophet, during the reign of Abu Bakr. Haroun, better known as Mussaylamah, addressed 
to the Prophet a letter whieh ran as follows: "From Mussaylamah the Prophet of Allah, to 
Muhammad the Prophet of Allah. Peaee be to you. I am your partner. Let the exereise of 
authority be divided between us. Half the earth will be mine, and half will belong to your Quraish. 
But the Quraish are too greedy to be satisfied with a just division." To this letter the Prophet 
replied as follows: "From Muhammad the Messenger of Allah to Mussaylamah the liar. Peaee be 
to those who follow the right path. The earth belongs to Allah. It is He Who makes the reign 
whomsoever He pleases. Only those will prosper who fear the Lord." 

Prophet Muhammad's last days 

The health of the Prophet grew worse. His last days were remarkable for the eahnness and 
serenity of his mind. He was able, though weak and feeble, to lead the publie prayers until within 
three days of his death. He requested that he might be permitted to stay at 'Aisha's house elose to 
the mosque during his illness, an arrangement to whieh his other wives assented. As long as his 
strength lasted, he took part in the publie prayers. The last time he appeared in the mosque he 
addressed the eongregation, after the usual prayers were over, in the following words: "O 
Muslims, if I have wronged anyone of you, here I am to answer for it; if I owe anything to 
anyone, all I may happen to possess belongs to you." A man in the erowd rose and elaimed three 
Dhirhams whieh he had given to a poor man at the request of the Prophet. They were immediately 
paid baek with these words: "Better to blush in this world than in the next." 

The Prophet then prayed and implored Allah's merey for those who had fallen in the perseeution 
of their enemies. He reeommended to all his followers the observanee of religious duties and the 
leading of a life of peaee and goodwill. Then he spoke with emotion and with a voiee still so 
powerful as to reaeh beyond the outer doors of the mosque: "By the Lord in Whose hand lies the 
soul of Muhammad as to myself, no man ean lay hold on me in any matter; I have not made lawful 
anything exeepting what Allah has made lawful; nor have I prohibited anything but that whieh 
Allah in His Book has prohibited." 



Then turning to the women who sat elose by, he exelahned: "O Fathnah, my, daughter, and Safia, 
my aunt, work you both that whieh proeure you aeoeptanee with the Lord, for verily I have no 
power to save you in any wise." He then rose and re-entered the house of Aisha. 

The death of Prophet Muhammad, peace he upon him 

After this, the Prophet never appeared at publie prayers. A few hours after he returned from the 
mosque, the Prophet died while laying his head on the bosom of Aisha. As soon as the Prophet's 
death was announeed, a erowd of people gathered at the door of the house of Aisha, exelaiming: 
"How ean our messenger be dead?" Umar said: "No, he is not dead; he will be restored to us, and 
those are traitors to the eause of Islam who say he is dead. If they say so let them be eut in 
pieees." But Abu Bakr entered the house at this moment, and after he had touehed the body of the 
Prophet with a demonstration of profound afieetion, he appear at the door and addressed the 
erowd with the following speeeh: "O Muslims, if anyone of you has been worshipping 
Muhammad, then let me tell you that Muhammad is dead. But if you really do worship Allah then 
know that Allah is living and will never die. Do you forget the verse in the Quran: 

"Muhammad is not more than a Messenger, and indeed (many) Messengers have passed away 
before him. If he dies or is killed, will you then turn your back on your heels (as disbeliveers) ? 
And he who turns back on his heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah, and Allah will give 
reward to those who are grateful. " (Ch 3:144 Quran). 

Upon hearing this speeeh of Abu Bakr, 'Umar aeknowledged his error, and the erowd was 
satisfied and dispersed. 

Al-Abbas, the Prophet's unele, presided at the preparation for the burial, and the body was duly 
washed and perfumed. There was some dispute between the Quraish and the Ansars as to the 
plaee of burial; however, Abu Bakr settled the dispute by affirming that he had heard the Prophet 
say that a prophet should be buried at the very spot where he died. A grave was aeeordingly