MEN & WOMEN 
AROUND 
THE MESSENGER 


Joga ll Jo % «Li 9 Jay) 


= , . , = 
(ee ee! 2 Ye SL —_) 


Dar Al Manaral 


MEN& WOMEN 
AROUND 


THE MESSENGER 


by 
Khaalid Muhammad Khaalid 
Dr . Abdel - Hamid Eliwa 


gust J ga elanig Slay 


( Ghylanall y dylarall bua Ga ge) 


AVE GR UC OREVIES 
o gil tral} wc /3 


Translated by 
Sheikh Muhammad Mustafa Gemeiah 


Dr . Abdel - Hamid Eliwa 
AI Azhar University 


Edited by 
Aelfwine Acelas Mischler 


Dar Al-Manarah 
For Translation, Publishing & Distribution 
El-Mansoura ~ Egypt - Tel Fax: 002050/2030254 
Hand phone: 012/3605049 - P.O.BOX: 35738 
E. mail: almanarah400@hotmail.com 


© Dar Al-Manarah for Translation, Publishing & Distribution 1423/2003 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 

retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 

mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without written permission 
from the publisher. 


Dar Al-Manarah 


For Translation, Publishing & Distribution 
El-Mansoura — Egypt - Tel Fax: 002050/2030254 
Hand phone: 012/3605049 - P.O.BOX: 35738 
E. mail: almanarah400@hotmail.com 


Dar Al Kotob Library Number 
2002 / 19100 


I.8.B.N : 977 - 6005 - 21 -7 


MEN 
AROUND THE 


MESSENGER 


VOLUME ONE 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Translator’s Preface I 

Notes on Transliteration 111 

Introduction Vv 

The Light They Followed 1 

1- Mus’ab Ibn ‘Umair 19 
2- Salmaan Al-Faarisiy 30 
3- Abu Dhar El-Ghifaariy 44 
4- Bilaal Ibn 65 
5- ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar 78 
6- Sa’d Ibn Abi Waqqaas 91 
7- S.uhaib Ibn Sinaan 106 
8- Mu’ aadh Ibn Jabal 112 
9- Al-Miqdaad Ibn “Amr 118 
10- Sa’iid Ibn ‘Aamir 124 
11- Hamzah Lbn ‘Abd Al-Muttalib 131 
12- ‘Abd Allah Jbn Mas’uud 145 
13- Hudhaifah Lbn Al-Yamaan 154 
14- ‘Ammaar Ibn Yaasir 163 
15- ‘Ubaadah Ibn As - Saamit 179 
16- Khabbaab Ibn Al-Arat 183 
17- Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah 190 
18- ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh’uun 196 
19- Zaid Ibn Haarithah 203 
20- Ja’far Ibn Abi Taalib 211 
21- ‘Abd Allah Lbn Rawaahah 220 
22- Khaalid Thn Al-Waliid 225 
23- Qais Jbn Sa’d Ibn ‘Ubaadah 248 
24- ‘Umair Ibn Wahb 253 
25- Abu Ad-Dardaa’ 261 
26- Zaid Lbn Al-Khaljaab 271 
27- Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaid Allah 277 
28- Az-Zubair Ibn Al-’-Awaam 287 
29- Khubaib Ibn ‘Adiy 294 
30- ‘Umair Ibn Sa’d 302 
31- Zaid IbnThaabit 310 
32-KhaalidIbnSa’iid 317 
33-Abu Aiyuub Al-Ansaariy 323 
34-Al- ‘Abbaas Ibn ‘Abd Al-Muttalib 329 
35- Abu Hurairah 340 
36- Al-Baraa’ Ibn Maalik 349 
37- ‘Utbah Ibn Ghazwaan 355 
38-Thaabit Ibn Qais 359 


39- Usaid Ibn Hudair 363 


40- ‘Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf 
41- Abu Jaabir ‘Abd Allah Jbn ‘Amr Ibn Hiraam 
42- ‘Amr Lbn Al-Jamuuh 

43- Habiib Ibn Zaid 

44- Ubaiy Ibn Ka’b 

45- Sa’d Ibn Mu’aadh 

46- Sa’d Ibn “Ubaadah 

47- Usaamah Ibn Zaid 

48- ‘Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn Abi Bakr 
49- ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al-’ Aas 
50- Abu Sufyaan Jon Al-Haarith 
51- ‘Umraan Ibn Husain 

52- Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa’ 

53- ‘Abd Allah Ibn Az-Zubair 

54- ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Abbaas 

55- ‘Abbaad |lbn Bishr 

56- Suhail Ibn “Amr 

57- Abu Muusaa Al-Ash/ariy 

58- At-Infail Ibn ‘Amr Ad-Dawsiy 
59- ‘Amr Jbn Al-’ Aas 

60- Saalim Mawlaa Abi Hudhaifah 
61- Farewell 

62- women Around the Messenger 
Translaor ’s postscript 
Introduction 

The Mother of the Mankind 
Hawwa’ 

The Mother of the Prophets. 

Sara. 

Hajar 

Umm Musa. 

Maryam. 

The Prophet’s wives 

Khadija bint Khuailid. 

Sawda bint Zam’a 

Aisha bint Abu Bakr 

Hafsa bint ‘Umar 

Umm Salama 

Umm Habiba. 

Zaynab bint Jahsh 

Safiyya bint Huyay. 

Juayriya bint al-Harith 

Maymuna 

The Prophet as a husband 


368 
375 
378 
383 
388 
391 
398 
406 
412 
416 
423 
428 
431 
435 


. 443 


451 
456 
462 
474 
479 
487 
493 
301 

502 
503 
504 
505 
507 
508 
510 
513 

517 
321 

522 
528 
531 
535 

538 
543 
547 
550 
554 
556 

559 


The Prophet, the funny husband 560 


The Prophet, the strait husband 562 
The Prophet, the faithful husband. 565 
Polygamy 568 
Polygamy in Islam 573 
The rationale behind the multiplying of the Prophet (pbuh) 578 
Earlier Prophets and polygamy 579 
Polygamy in Christianity 582 
The rationale behind the multiplying of the Prophet’s wives 583 
The Prophet’s daughter 590 
Zaynab 591 
Ruqayya 595 
Fatima 597 
Umm Kulthum. 603 
The Prophet as a father 605 
The Prophet as a kind father 606 
The Prophet as a serious father 609 
Sahabiyyat 610 
Asma’ bint Abu Bakr 611 
Fatima bint al- Khattab 615 
Umm Kulthum bint ‘Ali 617 
Safiyya bint “Abdel-Muttalib. 619 
Sumayya bint Khayyat 621 
Asma’ bint Yazid ibn as-Sakan 622 
Umm Salim bint Malhan 624 
Umm Haram 628 
Umm Waraqa 630 
Asma’ bint ‘Amis. 631 
AshiShifa’ bint al-Harith 634 
Umm Hakim bint al-Harith 636 
Umm Ayman 638 
Hind bint “Utba. 639 
Umm Sharik 641 
Umm al-Fadl 642 
Ar-Rubai’ bint Mu’ awiya 644 
Al-Khansa’ 646 
Khawla bint Tha laba 648 
Umm Ruman E 650 
Umm ‘Imara 652 


Umm Mihjan 654 


i 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 


While reading this book, we cannot help but be moved by the 
lives of the Companions herein depicted. How we long to have their 
awe and reverence for Allah! How we long to spend the same hours in 
worship as they! How we long to be as brave as they were in the face 
of danger! How we long to be as patient as they were under torture! 


Narrated ‘Abd Allah (May Allah be pleased with him): The 
Prophet (PBUH) said, “The best people are those living in my 
generation, and then those who will follow them, and then those who 
will follow the latter. Then there will come some people who will bear 
witness before taking oaths, and take oaths before bearing witness.” 
(Bukhaari) 


It is our hope that this book will fulfill a need for the English- 
speaking Muslim to learn more about that first generation of Muslims. 
Indeed the Companions — those men and women who were 
contemporaneous with the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) —— inspire 
and encourage us. Read these stories and share them with your 
children, for these Companions are a part of our Islamic heritage that 
will, Allah willing, strengthen us as a nation if we try to follow their 
examples. 


Enough said for the reason for choosing this book to translate, 
for the book stands on its own merit. Let us explain our reasons for 
some choices within the translation. 


The translator is always faced with the question of how to 
transliterate Arabic names and whether to translate or transliterate 
Islamic terms. The reader may find the spelling of names in this book 
different than he or she is accustomed to. That is because we have 
chosen to transliterate as closely to the Arabic pronunciation as 
possible, believing that the English-speaking Muslim should make an 
effort to pronounce the names correctly. Lacking diacritic marks, 


i 
we have transliterated the long vowels with double vowels, which 


should not confuse the reader. Please refer to the notes on 
transliteration which follow. 


An exception to this is the spelling of some places names. If 
there is an English form of a name available, this has been used 
instead of a transliterated Arabic name. 


As for Islamic terms, we felt that most of the terms left in the 
Arabic would be familiar to the Muslim reader, and they have not 
been italicized as foreign terms although, as noted above, their 
spelling may not be the usual one. Many of these words have been 
incorporated into the English language and may be found in many 
dictionaries, although the Muslim reader is not always satisfied with 
the dictionary’s definition. Therefore, a glossary has been provided for 
those words which may not be familiar to all readers. 


Numbers within parentheses refer to surah and verse of the Holy 
Qur’aan. 


Many thanks to those who helped in the translation, revision, 
editing and typing of this text: Dr. Ahlam Fathy, Dr. Amany Abu Al- 
Fadl, Mona Yunus, Raw’ah Al-Khateeb, Amal Abu Sitah, Dr. Abdul 
Karim Kamara, Professor ‘Umar Abdul Hakeem, Michael White and 
Nariman Ezz. 


May Almighty Allah accept this work, and may we and all those 
who participated in the preparation of this text be accepted into the 
presence of the Most High on the day when nothing, neither wealth 
nor children, will be useful. 


ill 
NOTES ON TRANSLITERATION 


Arabic English 

¢ ‘(omitted in initial position) 
= b 

Gs t 


h or t ( when followed by another Arabic word) 


ot 


oo th 
ia J 

c h 
t kh 
s) d 
3 dh 
s) r 
Jj Zz 
ww s 
rey sh 
ue s 
us d 
52 t 
4 dh 
& \ 


C. 


f G 


n 
h 
w (consonant or dipthong) uu (long vowel) 
y( consonant ) ii (long vowel) 
aa(_ long vowel) 

fathah a 

kasrah i 

dummah u 


shiddah double letter 


Vv 


IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, 


THE MOST BENEFICENT, THE MOST MERCIFUL 
INTRODUCTION 


It was neither invented discourse nor false rumor that was 
recorded in history about the great company of men who came into the 
world of belief and faith. That is because the entirety of human history 
has never witnessed such accurate documentation, honesty, and 
investigation of facts as did that epoch of Islamic history and its men. 
An extraordinary human effort has been exerted to study and pursue 
its tidings. Successive generations of able and brilliant scholars have 
not left unexamined even the smallest details nor minutest 
explanations concerning that early epoch without putting them under 
microscopic investigation, scrutiny,,and criticism. 


The spectacular magnitude we encounter on the pages of this 
book of those colossal men of the Companions of the Messenger 
(PBUH) is not something legendary, even though they may seem like 
legends due to their miraculous nature! These are facts characteristic 
of the personality and life of the Prophet’s Companions. They soar 
high and are exalted and ennobled, not because of the author or, 
depicter, but because of what the Companions themselves desired and 
the extraordinary and righteous effoxt. they exerted for the sake of 
excelling and attaining perfection. 


This book does not claim the power to present this immaculate 
and extraordinary magnitude to the reader. Suffice it to refer to its 
characteristics and to approach its horizon. 

Surely history has not witnessed men who set their intentions 
and will to achieve a totally lofty and just goal and then devoted their 
entire lives to it in such an extremely fearless manner, with 


personal sacrifice and exertion, as it has witnessed in these men 
around the Messenger (PBUH). 


They came to life at their appointed time and their promised 
day. When life was craving for someone to rejuvenate its spiritual 
values, those Companions came with their noble Messenger (PBUH) 
as heralds and sincere believers. When life was craving for someone 
to remove the shackles of troubled humanity and to liberate its 
existence and destiny, they came and stood by their great Messenger 


vl 
as revolutionaries and liberators. When life was craving for someone 


to present human civilization with new and sound inclination, they 
came as pioneers and luminaries. 


How could those righteous men achieve what they did in a few 
years How did they triumph over the ancient world, with all its empires 
and sovereignties, and turn it into a ruinous mount L How could they 
build with Allah’s Qur’aan and His Words a new world reverberating 
with freshness, glittering with glory and surpassing in capability! Above 
all, how were they able, with the speed of light, to illuminate human 
conscience with the truth of monotheism and sweep away forever the 
paganism of ancient centuries ! This was their real miracle! 

Moreover, their real miracle resides in that remarkable 
psychological power with which they shaped their virtues and adhered 
to their faith in a manner that defies comparison. 

However, all their achieved miracles were nothing but a modest 
reflection of the greater miracle that enlightened the world on the day 
Allah willed His noble Qur’aan to be sent down, His honorable 
Messenger to deliver the message, and the procession of Islam to start 
its paces on the road of enlightenment. 

In this book, which was previously published in five separate 
parts and is issued now in a complete new edition, we present sixty 
personalities of the Prophet’s Companions, (May Allah have peace 
upon them all). As mentioned at the conclusion of this book, these 
sixty men represent several thousand others of their brethren who 
were contemporaneous with the Messenger (PBUH) and who believed 
in him and supported him. In their reflection we see the images of all 
the Companions. We see their faith, their constancy, their heroism and 
their loyalty to Allah and His Messenger (PBUH). We see the effort 
they exerted, the calamities they endured, and the victory they 
achieved. We also see the eminent role they played in liberating all 
humanity from the paganism of conscience and the loss of destiny. 

Now let us approach in awe and delight those righteous men, to 
welcome the best human examples, the most graceful and most 
virtuous. Let us see under their humble garments the most sublime and 
lofty in greatness and wisdom known to the whole world. Let us 
witness the legion of truth treading the ancient world in piety, filling 
the sky with standards of new truth in which they announced the 
religion of monotheism and the liberation of mankind. 

Khaalid Muhammad Khaalid 


THE LIGHT THEY FOLLOWED 


What a teacher he was, and what a man! He was filled with 
greatness, honesty, and sublimity! Truly, those overwhelmed with his 
greatness have their excuse, and those who sacrificed their lives for 
his sake are the most triumphant. 


Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd Allah was Allah’s Messenger to the 
people in the midsummer of life. What mystery was available to him 
that made him a man to honor among human beings~ And what grand 
hands did he extend towards heaven to let all the gates of mercy, 
blessing, and guidance open widely ~ What faith, what chastity, and 
what purity I What modesty, what love and what loyalty) What 
devotion to truth and what reverence to life and the living? 


Allah bestowed upon him the amount of blessing to qualify him 
to carry His standard and speak for Him, and made him capable of 
being the last of His messengers. Therefore, Allah’s bounty towards 
him was great. But however the brains, inspiration, and pens compete 
to talk about him or to sing hymns of praise to reveal his greatness, 
they all seem insignificant due to his superior traits. 


* * * 


If the introductory pages of this book need to start with a talk 
about the Messenger (PBUH), they cannot hope to give him his due of 
praise nor claim that they are really introducing the great Messenger 
to the readers. It is only a mere reference to his eminence and some of 
his superior qualities which make people cherish him and which drew 
him an unprecedented loyalty by some of the figures mentioned in the 
book — whether they were Muhaajiruun or An~aar or from the 
Quraish. 


No sooner had life emerged than Allah made all its breeze hail 
his coming, and sent messengers to all men everywhere, carrying the 
principles of the divine call and the fragrance of the caller, the truth 
of the teachings, the eminence of the master, the enlightenment of the 
message and the compassion of the Messenger (PBUH). 


That is true. This was the main objective, no more. It is to . 
perceive in the light of one of his beams some of the traits of his rare 
eminence that brought about the believers’ loyalty and made them 
perceive in him the goal and the way, the teacher and the friend. 


What made the nobles of his people hasten to his words and 
his religion} Abu Bakr, Talhah, Az-Zubair, ‘Uthmaan Ibn *Affaan, 
“Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn *Awf, and Sad Ibn Abi Waqgqaas, all 
abandoned in haste the wealth and glory of their community which 
surrounded them, receiving at the same time heavy burdens in life, 
full of cares, troubles, and conflict. 


What made the weak of his community seek his protection, 
hasten to his standard and his call, when they saw him without 
wealth or weapon, with harm inflicted upon him and evil following 
him in a terrifying way, without his being able to avoid it} 


What made the pre-Islamic tyrant ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, who 
went to cut off his noble head with his sword, return to cut off with 
the same sword — made sharper through faith — the heads of the 
Prophet's enemies and his persecutors | 


What made the city’s elite and noble men go to him and promise 
to be his companions, voluntarily embracing a set of trouble and 
terror, knowing that the struggle between them and the Quraish 
would be more horrifying than terror itself | 


What made those who believed in him increase and not 


decrease, though he declared day and night, "I hold no good or harm 
for you. I do not know what will become of me or you's 


What made them believe that the world would open its 
countries to them and that their feet would be wading in the gold and 
crowns of the worlds And that the Qur'aan they were reciting in 
secret would reverberate in strong tones and ringing voice, not only in 
their own generation or in their own peninsula but throughout the 
ages and everywhere 


What made them believe the prophecy told them by the 
Messenger, though when they turned right and left they found nothing 
except heat, barren land, and stones emitting boiling vapor, their 
pointed heads looking like devils’ heads | 


What filled their hearts with certainty and will-power | 
It was Ibn “Abd Allah, who else could have done that } 


They saw themselves with their own eyes all his virtues and all 
that distinguished him. They saw his chastity, his purity, his 
honesty, his straightforwardness, and his courage. They saw his 
superiority and his compassion. They saw his intellect and his 
eloquence. They saw the sun shining the way his truth and 
eminence shone. 


They heard the growth of life running in his veins when 
Muhammad started to bestow upon them his daily revelation and his 
past contemplation. They saw all these and more, not through a 
mask but face to face and in practice, through their own vision and 
perception. 


When an Arab of those days saw something, he would talk as 
an expert. The Arabs were people of perception and intuition. If 
one of them saw some footprints on the road, he would tell you, 
"These are the footprints of such-and-such a person." He would smell 
the breath of the one talking to him and realize what truth or falsity 
was inherent. 


These men saw Muhammad and were his contemporaries since 
his coming into existence as a newborn babe. Nothing was concealed 


from them in his life. The stage of childhood which is unperceived by 
other than the child’s people and close relations was, in the case of 
Muhammad, seen and perceived by all the people of Makkah. That 
was because his childhood was not like any other. It drew attention to 
itself for its early signs of manliness and initiative, and for rejecting 
the usual play of children for the seriousness of men. 


As an example, the Quraish used to talk about ‘Abd AlI- 
Muilalib’s grandson who kept away from the children’s playgrounds 
and their celebrations, and used to say whenever he was invited to 
them, “I was not created for that.” 


Moreover, when his wet-nurse Haliimah took him back to his 
people, she told them her observations, her experience with the child, 
and what she saw in him to convince them he was not an ordinary 
child. She believed there was a hidden secret in him, unkiiown except 
to Allah, which might be revealed one day. 


As to his youth, what chastity! He was clearer and more 
translucent. His people’s preoccupation with him and their talk about 
him were more constant and praising. As to his manhood, it was fully 
perceived by every eye, ear, and heart. Above all, it was his 
community’s conscience, measuring through his conduct and behavior 


all their visions of truth, goodness, and beauty. 
* e 


It was, then, a transparent and comprehended life from cradle to 
grave. All his visions, his steps, his words, his movements, even his 
dreams, his hopes, and his remembrances were the right of all the 
people from the first day he was born. It was as if Almighty Allah 
wished it to be like that to tell the people, “That is My Messenger to 
you; his way 1s through reason and intellect, and that is his whole life 
since he was a baby”. 


Therefore, with all you possess of reason and intellect, examine 
his life and judge. Do you perceive any sense of suspicion? Do you 


see any false matter? Did he ever tell a lie or betray anyone? Did he 
ever treat ~inyone unjustly? Did he ever expose a defect? Did he ever 
abandon his kinship relations? Did he neglect a duty or leave a noble 
action? Did he insult anyone or worship an idol? Peruse well and 
meticulously and investigate, as there is no stage of his life that 1s 
hidden or veiled. 

If his life as you see and perceive is nothing but purity, truth, 
and eminence, does it appeal to reason or logic that a man of such 
traits would tell lies after the age of forty? About whom would he lie? 
About Allah in order to claim he was His Messenger (PBUH), chosen, 
selected, and inspired by Him? 

No, this is the answer of feeling and intuition. What is your way 
of thinking and what right do you have to tell lies? 


This, we believe, was the attitude of the early believers towards 
Allah’s Messenger (PBUH), the Muhaajiruun as well as those who 
sheltered and supported him. 

It was a firm and swift attitude that did not leave any place for 
hesitation or idleness. A man who had such a pure and enlightened life 
could not play false with Allah. With such sharp insight, the believers 
saw the light of Allah and they followed. 


They would thank their insight when they saw later how Allah’s 
Messenger (PBUH) was supported by Allah and how the whole 
peninsula was obliged to him. Many unperceived blessings and spoils 
were bestowed upon them while he became more modest, more 
austere, and more pious, until he met Allah at the appointed time, 
lying down on a mat that left its impressions on his body. 


And when they saw him, the Messenger whose standards 
victoriously and proudly filled the horizon, descended the pulpit and 
received the people, saying while he wept, “Whoever’s back I 
whipped, here is my back, let him take his revenge; whoever’s money 
I took, here is my money, let him take of it.” 


The believers saw him while his uncle Al-- Abbaas was asking — 
him to offer him one of the jobs obtained by ordinary Muslims, and 


he gently apologized, saying, "Truly, uncle, we do not offer that job 
to someone who asks or someone who cares for it." 


They saw him not only sharing the trouble and hunger that 
befell people, but establishing for himself and his folk an unforsaken 
principle which was, "To be the first to feel hunger if people go 
hungry, and the last to satisfy his hunger when people were starving." 


Yes, the early believers would be more thankful for their insight 


which perceived things well even before they came, thanking Allah 
Who had guided them to faith. 


They would also see that life which was the best proof of the 
truth of the Messenger (PBUH) when he said to them: "I am Allah's 
Messenger unto you.” His life was truly eminent. Its eminence 
and purity are the best evidence of the truth of the great teacher and 
noble Messenger (PBUH). Its level of excellence and eminence 
never declined nor fell, but remained steadfast from cradle to grave. 


Throughout life and after reaching his prime, it was as clear as 
day that the man who led that life and conveyed such a message was 
not seeking wealth, money or sovereignty. When these were offered 
him ona golden platter associated with his triumphant leadership, he 
rejected them all and lived his life till the last breath devoting himself 
to Allah, repentant and chaste. 


He never deviated from the purposes of his great life the 
breadth of a hair, and never broke a promise to Allah in worship or 
in jihaad. 

No sooner would the latter part of the night begin than he 
would get up, make his ablution and remain as he was accustomed 


to do, invoking Allah, praying, and crying. 


Mountains of wealth and money were accumulated in his 


possession, yet he did not change and never took of it except as the 
poorest and lowest of Muslims did. Then he died leaving only his 


armor in mortgage. 


All the countries of the world came closer due to his call, and 
most of the kings of the earth stood before his message, in which he 
called them to Islam, in awe and supplication. Yet, not an atom of 
boasting or arrogance crossed his way even at a great distance. When 
he saw people approaching him troubled and disturbed out of awe 
and reverence, he said to them, "Be easy, my mother used to eat dried 
meat in Makkah." 


When all the enemies of his faith put down their weapons and 
bowed their heads waiting for him to pass judgment and while 
10,000 swords of the Muslims were glittering on the Day of 
Conquest over the hills of Makkah, he merely said to his enemies, 
"Disperse, you are free!” 


Even at the height.of the victory for which he devoted his life, 
he deprived himself of it. He walked in the victory procession on the 
Day of the Conquest bowing his head down until people could not 
see his face and repeated hymns of thanks to Allah in low tones, wet 
with tears, humbly raising his words to Allah until he reached the 
Ka*bah. He then confronted the idols and did what he did to them - 
and said, <Truth has come and falsehood has vanished, indeed, 
falsehood is bound to vanish > (17: 81). 


Is there any more doubt about his message? He was a man who 
dedicated his whole life to a call in which he had no personal gain of 
wealth, position, sovereignty, or power. Biographical immortality 
was not even considered by him because he believed solely in the 
immorality of the second life when one is in the hands of Allah. 


‘He was a man who spent his life from childhood till the age of 
forty in purity and contemplation. Then he spent the rest of it in 
worship, guidance, jihaad and struggle, and when the world was 
brightened to him he rejected all its false glory and adheredto his 
way, his worship, and his message. How could such a man be a liar? 


Why should be tell lies? Surely, such a man and such a messenger was 
above that! 
* * * 

We have mentioned that logic and reason were — and still are— 
the best proof of the truth of Muhammad (PBUH) when he said, “I am 
Allah’s Messenger.” It does not appeal to good logic or to sound 
reason that a man who lived such a good life lies about Allah. Early 
believers who hastened to believe in his message, and whom we are 
honored to know something about through the pages of this book, had 
such a relation with him after their guidance from Allah, which is the 
best evidence of logic and reason. 

We see Muhammad (PBUH) before his message, and we see 
him after his message. We see him in his cradle, and we see him 
shrouded by death. But, have we seen any contradiction or 
inconsistency in all his life? Never! 


Let us now approach the first years of his message. Those were 
years one rarely finds an equal to in the annals of history for the 
constancy, truth, and eminence. Those were the years which revealed, 
more than any others, all the facets of the teacher and guide of all 
humanity. Those were years that opened the living book of his life and 
heroism and, more than any other years, represented the cradle of his 
muracles. 


Throughout those years, the Messenger of Allah was alone. He 
left all he possessed of comfort, security, and settled life. He 
approached the people with what they were not familiar, or rather with 
what they detested. He approached them and directed his words to 
their reasons, and it is a difficult task for a person who directs his 
speech to the minds of people instead of their feelings. The Messenger 
of Allah, Muhammad (PBUH) did not only do that, since the 
consequence of addressing the mind might be bearable if you are 
standing within the circle of common conventions and common 
aspirations. But when you call them towards a distant future which 
you perceive but they do not, which you live in and they are not 


aware of, it is a difficult task. Indeed, when you address their minds 
and rise to destroy the essence of their lives from the base, though you 
do that in a sincere, honest way and not urged by a certain purpose or 
glory, it is a risk which cannot be taken except by the leaders of the 
righteous people and messengers. 

The Messenger (PBUH) was the hero and great master of that 
situation. The form of worship at that time was worshiping idols, 
whose rites were observed as a religion. The Messenger (PBUH) did 
not turn to any maneuvers or intrigues. The unpaved road and the 
heavy burden would have been good excuses if he had used his 
brilliant mind to prepare them for the word “monotheism” instead of 
surprising them with it. He was able and it was his nght to prepare to 
isolate the community from its idol-gods which had been handed 
down from generation to generation for centuries. He could have st 
started by going around the issue to avoid as much as possible a 
direct confrontation he knew would bestir all the envy of his people 
and draw upon them all their weapons against him. 

Yet, he did not. This illustrates that he was a Messenger 
(PBUH). He heard a divine voice within him telling him to rise, and 
he did, and telling him to deliver the message, and he did so without 
the force of weapons and without fleeing! He confronted them from 
the first instant with the essence of the message and the core of the 
case: “O people, I am the Messenger of Allah unto you, to worship 
Him and not to set partners with Him. These idols are intellectual 
falsehood. They are of no harm or benefit to you.” 

From the very beginning he faced them with such clear and 
plain words, and from the very beginning he faced the severe struggle 
which he had to undergo until his departure from life! 


Or were the early believers in need of a prompting power to 
support the Prophet (PBUH)! 

What awakened conscience would not be stirred by such a rare 
and unique scene! It was the scene of a man known to the people to 
have full intellectual power and immaculate behavior, standing alone, 


10 


facing his people with a call which could bring mountains down. 
Words were issuing forth from his heart and 


lips, obedient and superb, as if in them lay all the power, will, and 
design of the future, as if it were fate announcing its proclamation! 


But perhaps this was the prompting of a good spirit, after 
which Muhammad (PBUH) would worship his Lord as he liked, 
leaving the deities of his people in their place and leaving his 
community's religion alone. 


If such a thought occurred to some minds at that time, 
Muhammed (PBUH) soon dissipated it. He made it quite clear to the 
people that he was a Messenger and had to convey the message, that 
he could not be silent nor turn into himself after being guided by the 
truth and enlightenment. All the powers of the world and nature 
could not have silenced him or stopped him because it was Allah 
Who made him speak and move and Who guided his footsteps. 


The Quraish’s reaction came as swift as flames stirred by a 
violent wind. Troubles began to be wreaked upon a soul 
unaccustomed to anything but absolute grace. The Messenger 
(PBUH) then began to teach his first lessons with utmost mastery 
and amazing loyalty. The image of this scene is paramount in all 
places and at all times, as well as in history. Those with an 
awakened conscience in Makkah were pleased, filled with 
admiration, and came closer. They beheld a lofty and majestic man. 
They did not know whether his neck had become longer until it was 
able to touch the sky or the sky had come down to crown his head. 
They beheld loyalty, steadfastness and eminence. 


However, the best scene they beheld was on the day when the 
noblemen of the Quraish went to Abu Taalib saying, "Verily, we 
cannot tolerate a person who insults our fathers, mocks our dreams, 
and finds fault with our deities. You either stop him or we fight both 
of you until one of the parties is destroyed.” 


Abu Taalib sent a message to his nephew saying, "My nephew, 
your people have approached me and talked about your affairs. You 
have to think of me and yourself and not burden me with what I 
cannot endure." 


What then was the attitude of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH)? 
The only man who had stood with him seemed to be abandoning him, 
or rather seemed unable to confront the Quraish who sharpened all 
their teeth. The Messenger (PBUH) did not hesitate in his reply, and 
his determination did not waver. No! He did not even search for the 
words to show his tenacity. It was already there, efficiently rising to 
deliver one of his most significant lessons to the whole of humanity 
and to dictate its highest principles. 


Thus he spoke: "O uncle, by Allah, if they put the sun on my _ 
right and the moon on my left in order to abandon this matter until it 
is manifested by Allah or I perish by it, | would never abandon it!" 


Peace be upon you, O Prophet of Islam, you who were colossal 
among men, and your words were colossal. 


Abu Taalib thereupon restored his courage and the courage of 
his forefathers at once, clasped the right hand of his nephew with his 
two hands, and said, "Say what you like, for, by Allah, I will never 
force you to do anything at all." 


Muhammad (PBUH) then did not depend on his uncle for 
protection and security, though his uncle was capable of that, but he 
was the one bestowing security, protection and steadfastness on 
people around him. 


Any honest person who beholds a scene like that cannot but 
hasten to love, be loyal to, and believe in that Messenger (PBUH). 


* % * 


His persistence regarding truth, his perseverence with the 
message, and his patience during great troubles were all for the sake 


of Allah and not for personal benefit. All these were bound to attract 
brilliant minds and to awaken the conscientious people to follow the 
light beckoning to them and hasten to the honest and true Messenger 
(PBUH) who came to purify our souls and guide us. People beheld 
him while harm was reaching him from every corner. The condolence 
he had sought in his uncle Abu Taalib and his wife Khadijah was 
denied him because they both died within days of each other. 


Whoever desires to imagine the extent of persecution and war 
launched by the Quraish against the unarmed Messenger, suffice it to 
know that Abu Lahab himself, who was his most bitter nval and 
enemy, was so conscience-stricken one day by what he beheld that he 
announced he would protect the Messenger, help him, and stand 
against any aggression against him. But the Messenger refused his 
protection and remained lofty, raising his head and remaining loyal to 
his message. Nobody could avert harm from him because nobody 
dared to do so! Even the eminent Abu. Bakr could do nothing but 
weep. 

One day, the Messenger (PBUH) went to the Ka’bah and, while 
he was circumambulating it, the nobles of the Quraish who were 
waiting for him suddenly ran and surrounded him, saying, “Is it you 
that say such-and-such a thing about our deities?” And he calmly 
answered them, “Yes, I say that.” They held him by the end of his 
clothes while Abu Bakr pleaded for his release, saying with tears 
pouring, “Are you going to kill a man for saying, Allah is my Lord?” 

* * 


* 
Whoever saw the Messenger on the day of Ai-laa’if was sure to 
see some example of his truth and loyalty worthy of him. He turned 


his face towards the tribe of Thagiif, calling them to Allah, the One 
and the Vanquisher. 


Was not what he was encountering from his clan and his folk 
enough? Did it not warn him of an increasing harm when it comes 
from people he had no blood relations with? Absolutely not, because 
these harmful consequences were not considered by him. Almighty 


13 


Allah had commanded him to deliver the message, and that was 
enough. He remembered the day when the intransigence of his 
community increased and he went home covering himself in bed in 
sorrow. He heard the voice of heaven reaching his heart, and 
immediately he heard the voice of revelation casting the same matter 
as on the day of the cave: < 0 you encovered --- Arise and warn> 

(74: 1-2). 

Then he had to deliver the message and warn. Therefore, he was 
a Messenger who did not care about harm and did not search for 
comfort. Let him go then to At-laa’if to convey the word of Allah to 
Its people. 

There, however, the nobles of the community surrounded him 
and were more cunning than their mates in Makkah. They set children 
and hooligans against him, and they abandoned the most sacred of the 
customs of the Arabs, which is hospitality to guests and protection of 
the one who asks for help. 


They set their hooligans and their young boys after the 
Messenger (PBUH), throwing stones at him. This was the one for 
whom the Quraish offered to collect money to make him the richest 
among them and to be their leader and king! Yet, he refused saying, “I 
am but the slave of Allah and His Messenger.” 


Now we behold him in A~-laa’if where he retired to an orchard 
to be protected by its walls from the pursuit of the hooligans. His right 
hand was stretched towards heaven praying to Allah while his left 
hand was protecting his face from the stones thrown at him. He was 
calling to his Creator and Lord, saying, “If You are not angry with me, 
I do nQt care for other things, but granting me Your mercy is too 
generous of You.” 

Indeed, he was a Messenger who knew how to address his Lord 
with courtesy! When he declared that he did not care about harm for 
the sake of Allah, he also declared that he was in dire need for mercy 
granted by Allah. In a situation like this, he did not feel proud about 
his endurance and courage, nor did he boast. Boasting in such a 


situation might suggest bestowing favor on Allah, and this fact could 
not be hidden from Muhammad. Therefore, the best way to express 
his courage and endurance in such a situation was his pleading and 
his invocation. 


So he went on asking Allah's pardon and invoking Him, "O ~ 
Allah, to You I complain of the weakness of my strength, my inability 
to find a way, and my humiliation by the people. O the Most 
Compassionate, You are the Lord of the weak, and You are my Lord. 
To whom do You entrust me? To a distant relation who ignores me or 
to an enemy who has power over me? If You are not angry with me, I 
do not care about other things, but granting me Your mercy is too 
generous of You. I seek refuge in the light of Your face that brightens 
the darkness and amends the affairs of this world and the next. Do 
not be angry or dissatisfied with me. I beg Your favor until You are 
satisfied with me. There is no strength or power except through You.” 


What loyalty the Prophet (PBUH) had to his call! He was an 
unarmed person faced with plots everywhere he went. He had 
nothing in life to strengthen him, yet he carried all that persistence, all 
that steadfastness and loyalty! 


People beheld him returning from At-Taa'if to Makkah without 
any sense of despair or defeat, but more hopeful, optimistic, and 
dedicated. Moreover, he presented himself to the tribes, reaching 
them in their own localities and districts. One day he went to Bani 
Kindah, another day to Bani Haniifah, then to Bani ~Aamir, and thus 
from one tribe to another. He said to them all, "I am the Messenger of 
Allah to you. He commands you to worship Allah and not to take 
partners with Him, and to abandon what you worship of idols.” At 
the houses of the close-by tribes, Abu Lahab used to follow him, 
saying to the people, “Do not believe him, for he is calling you to what 
is false.” 


People beheld the Messenger of Allah in such a critical situation 
seeking believers and assistants, but he was met with ingratitude and 
enmity. They saw him refusing any bargains and refusing to have a 
worldly price for faith. 


In those scorching days, he presented himself to Bani “Aamir 
Ibn Sa‘sa‘ah and sat with them speaking about Allah and reciting 
some of His words. They inquired, "Do you believe that if we 
supported you in your affair and then Allah raised you above those 
who opposed you, we would take the matter after you?" He (PBUH) 
answered saying, "This matter is in the hands of Allah. He puts it 
wherever He wishes." There and then they dispersed, saying, "We 
need not your affair." The Messenger (PBUH) left them, looking for 
believers who do not buy a little worth with their faith. 


* * * 


People beheld him, but few believed in him. Despite their 
number, he found in them comfort and company. But the Quraish 
decided that each tribe should be in charge of giving lessons to the 
believers among them. So, suddenly, persecution descended like a 
mad storm and hit all the Muslims. The polytheists did not know a 
crime but committed it against the Muslims. However, here an 
unexpected surprise took place. Muhammad (PBUH) gave orders to 
all the Muslims to emigrate to Abyssinia and decided to remain alone 
to face the aggression! 


Why did he not emigrate to convey the word of Allah in another 
place, for Allah is the Lord of All the Worlds and not the Lord of the 
Quraish alone? Or why did he not let them stay with him, since in 
their staying there was confirmed benefit? Surely their stay in 
Makkah, in gpite of their small number, would have induced others to 
embrace Islam, the religion of Allah. 


Furthermore, there were among them a good number of the 
noblest families of the Quraish, the strongest and the most powerful. 
From the tribe of Bani Umaiyah there were ‘Uthmaan Ibn *Affaan, 
‘Amr Ibn Sa‘iid Ibn Al--Aas, and Khaalid Ibn Sa‘iid Ibn Al-‘Aas. 
From Bani Asad there were Az-Zubair Ibn Al- Awaam, Al-Aswad 
Ibn Nawfal, Yaziid Ibn Zam*ah ,and ‘Amr Ibn Umaiyah. From the 
tribe of Bani Zahrah there were “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, ‘Aamir 
Ibn Abi Wagqqaas, Maalik Ibn Ahyab, and Al-Muttalib Ibn Azhar. 
There were these and others whose families would not be patient for 


16 


long with their persecution and infliction of harm upon them. Why, 
then, did the Messenger (PBUH) not let them stay with him to support 
him and to be a sign of possible power in his hands? 


Here the eminence of Muhammad (PBUH), the Messenger of 
Allah shines. He did not want commotion or civil war, even if the 
probability of his success was there, or even if he was sure of his 
success! Here the Messenger’s humanity and compassion are 
illustrated, for he could not bear to see people persecuted because of 
him, although he was well aware that sacrifice was the price paid in 
every noble struggle and in every great mission. Sacrifice should be 
made whenever it was inevitable. But now, when it is possible to 
avoid suffering, let the Muslims tum that way. Why, then, did he not 
jom them? 

He was not commanded to depart. His place was there where 
idols were. He would keep uttermg the name of Allah, the One. He 
would keep receivipg pain and harm without anxiety or disquietude 
since it was he who was harmed and not those weak people who 
believed in him and followed him and not even those noble men who 
also believed in him and followed him! Whoever knows examples of 
such cases of steadfastness and nobility of sacrifice, let him come up 
with them. It is a lofty matter capable only of leading messengers and 
chosen ones. 

*K ca * 

The man and the Messenger came together in Muhammad 
(PBUH) in such a magnificent arid well-knit encounter. Those who 
had doubts in his message did not have any doubt in his eminence, the 
purity of his quintessence, or the purity of his humanity. Allah, Who 
knew where to place His Message, had chosen such a man who was 
the best humanity could achieve in elevation, loftrness, and honesty. 
People heard him reprimanding them for any exaggeration in 
glorifying him or even when they merely stated his eminence without 
any exaggeration. He prohibited them even from standing up in his 
presence when he came upon them when they were seated. 


17 


He said, “Do not stand as non-Arabs do when they glorify one 
another.” 

When the sun eclipsed on the day of the death of his beloved 
son Ibraahiim, the Muslims mentioned that it was an eclipse out of 
sadness for the loss of Ibraahim. But the great and honest Messenger 
(PBUH) hastened to refute and negate this assumption before it turned 
into a legend. He stood among the Muslims, addressing them as 
follows: “The sun and the moon are two of the signs of Allah. They 
never eclipse for the death or life of anybody.” 

He was the one trusted with the minds of people and their 
thinking, and so accomplishing what was entrusted to htm was more 
worthy than the glory of all the world. He was certain that he came to 
humanity to change their way of life and that he was not a Messenger 
to the Quraish alone, or to the Arabs only, but was Allah’s Messenger 
to all the people on earth! 

Almighty Allah directed his vision to how far his mission would 
reach and his banner flutter. He perceived the truth of the faith he 
announced, the living immortality tt would have until Allah inherits 
the earth and those upon it. Nevertheless, he did not see in himself, or 
his religion or his unprecedented success more than a brick in the 
construction! This great man stood to proclatm this idea in one of his 
best statements, saying, “The relation between prophets who came 
before me and myself is like a man who built a house and constructed 
it well and decorated it, except for a brick in one of its corners. This 
made people go round it and express their astonishment, saying, 
Won’t this brick be placed? I am such a brick, and I am the last of the 
Prophets.” 

All that long life he lived, all his struggles and heroism, all his 
glory and purity, all the victory achieved in his life for his religion and 
the victory he knew would be achieved after his death were nothing 
but a brick, a mere brick tn a lofty and deeply founded building. He 
was the one who proclaimed this and reiterated it. In addition, he did 
not make up such a speech out of assumed modesty, to nourish a 
hunger for glory. He emphasized the situation as a fact. Its delivery 


and transmission he considered part of the quintessence of his 
message. Though modesty was one of the essential characteristics of 
Muhammad (PBUH), it was not the only sign of his greatness, which 
reached an unrivaled level of excellence and superiority to be a sign 
and a symbol itself. 


That was the teacher of mankind and the last of the prophets. 
He was the light seen by the people, and he lived among them as a 
human being, and then after his departure from this world, he was 
seen by the whole world as a truth and a memory. 


Now, while we meet a number of his noble Companions on the 
following pages of this book — where we will be astonished by their 
faith, their sacrifices, and the good cause they set for their lives, 
which was unprecedented — the reason for their marvelous lives will 
be clear before us. 


This reason was nothing but the light they followed who was 
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah (PBUH). Almighty Allah had 
combined in him the vision of truth and self-dignity, which honored 
life and illuminated the destiny of mankind. 


19 


(1) 
MUSAB IBN “‘UMAIR 
The First Envoy of Islam 


This man among the Companions of the Prophet Muhammad 
(PBUH), how good it is for us to start with him. He was the flower of 
the Quraish, the most handsome and youthful! Historians and 
narrators describe him as "the most charming of the Makkans". 


He was born and brought up in wealth, and he grew up with its 
luxuries. Perhaps there was no boy in Makkah who was pampered 
by his parents like Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair. This mirthful youth, caressed 
and pampered, the talk of the ladies of Makkah, the jewel of its clubs 
and assemblies: is it possible for him to be one of the legends of 
faith? 


By Allah, how interesting a tale, the story of Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair 
or Mus‘ab the Good, as he was nicknamed among the Muslims! He 
was one of those made by Islam and fostered by the Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH). 


But who was he? His story is a pride of all mankind. The youth 
heard one day what the people of Makkah had begun to hear about 
Muhammad the Truthful, that Allah had sent him as bearer of glad 
tidings and a warner to call them to the worship of Allah the One 
God. When Makkah slept and awoke there was no other talk but the 
Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) and his religion, and this spoiled boy 
was one of the most attentive listeners. 


That was because, although he was young, the flower of clubs 
and assemblies, the outward appearance of wisdom and common 
sense were among the traits of Mus*ab. 


He heard that the Prophet (PBUH) and those who believed in 


20 


him were meeting far away from the dignitaries and great men of the 
Quraish at As-Safaa in the house of Al-Argam Ibn Al-Argam (Daar 
Al-Arqam). He wasted no time. He went one night to the Daar Al- 
Arqam, yearning and anxious. There, the Prophet (PBUH) was 
meeting his Companions, reciting the Qur’aan to them and praying 
with them to Allah the Most Exalted. Mus’ab had hardly taken his seat 
and contemplated the verses of Qur’aan recited by the Prophet 
(PBUH) when his heart became the promised heart that night. 


The pleasure almost flung him from his seat as he was filled 
with a wild ecstasy. But the Prophet (PBUH) patted his throbbing 
heart with his blessed right hand, and the silence of the ocean’s depth 
filled his heart. In the twinkling of an eye, the youth who had just 
become Muslim appeared to have more wisdom than his age and a 
determination that would change the course of time! 


* * * 


Mus~ab’s mother was Khunaas Bint Maalik, arid people feared 
her almost to the pomt of terror because she possessed a strong 
personality. When Mus’ab became a Muslim, he was neither careful 
before nor afraid of anyone on the face of the earth except his mother. 
Even if Makkah, with all its idols, nobles, and deserts were to 
challenge him, he would stand up to it. As for a dispute with his 
mother, this was an impossible horror, so he thought quickly and 
decided to keep his Islam secret until Allah willed. He continued to 
frequent Daar Al-Arqam and take lessons from the Prophet (PBUH). 
He was satisfied with his farth and avoided the anger of his mother, 
who had no knowledge of his embracing Islam. 


However, Makkah at that time kept no secret, for the eyes and 
ears of the Quraish were everywhere, very alert and checking every 
footprint in its hot sands. Once, ‘Uthmaan Ibn Jalhah saw him 
steadily entering Al-Arqam’s house, then he saw him a econd tim- 


21 


praying the prayer like Muhammad. No sooner had he seen him than 
he ran quickly with the news to Mus‘ab's mother, who was astonished 
by it. 


Mus*ab stood before his mother, the people, and the nobles of 
Makkah who assembled around him, telling them the irrefutable truth 
and reciting the Qur'aan with which the Prophet (PBUH) cleansed 
their hearts and filled them with honor, wisdom, justice, and piety. 


His mother aimed a heavy blow at him, but the hand which was 
meant as an arrow soon succumbed to the powerful light which 
increased the radiance of his face with innocent glory because it 
demanded respect with its quiet confidence. However, his mother, 
under the pressure of her motherliness, spared him the beating and the 
pain, although it was within her power to avenge her gods whom he 
had abandoned. Instead she took him to a rough corner of her house 
and shut him in it. She put shackles on him and imprisoned him there 
until he heard the news of the emigration (hijrah) of some of the 
believers to Abyssinia. He thought to himself and was able to delude 
his mother and his guards, and so escaped to Abyssinia. 


There he stayed in Abyssinia with his fellow emigrants and then 
returned with them to Makkah. He also emigrated to Abyssinia for 
the second time with the Companions whom the Prophet (PBUH) 
advised to emigrate and they obeyed. But whether Mus*ab was in 
Abyssinia or Makkah, the experience of his faith proclaimed itself in 
all places and at all times. 


Mus-ab became confident that his life had become good enough 
to be offered as a sacrifice to the Supreme Originator and great 
Creator. He went out one day to some Muslims while they were 
sitting around the Prophet (PBUH), and no sooner did they see him 
than they lowered their heads and shed some tears because they saw 
him wearing wornout garments. They were accustomed to his former 


22 


appearance before he had become a Muslim, when his clothes had 
been like garden flowers, elegant and fragrant. 


The Prophet (PBUH) saw him with the eyes of wisdom, 
thankful and loving, and his lips smiled gracefully as he said, "I saw 
Mus*ab here, and there was no youth in Makkah more petted by his 
parents than he. Then he abandoned all that for the love of Allah and 
His Prophet!" 


His mother had withheld from him all the luxury he had been 
overwhelmed by, when she could not return him to her religion. She 
refused to let anyone who had abandoned their gods eat of her food, 
even if he was her son. Her last connection with him was when she 
tried to imprison him for a second time after his return from 
Abyssinia, and he swore that if she did that, he would kill all those 
who came to her aid to lock him up. She knew the truth of his 
determination when he was intent and decided to do something, and 
so she bade him goodbye weeping. 


The parting moment revealed a strange adherence to infidelity 
on the part of his mother, and the greater adherence to faith on the 
part of her son. When she said to him, while turning him out of her 
house, "Go away, I am no longer your mother," he went close to her 
and said, "O mother, I am advising you and my heart is with you, 
please bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that 
Muhammad is His servant and messenger." She replied to him, angrily 
raging, “By the stars, I will never enter your religion, to degrade my 
status and weaken my senses!" 


So Mus‘ab left the great luxury in which he had been living. He 
became satisfied with a hard life he had never seen before, wearing 
the roughest clothes, eating one day and going hungry another. 
This spirit, which was grounded in the strongest faith, adorned with 


23 


the light of Allah, made him another man, one who appeals to the 
eyes of other great souls. 


* + *% 


While he was in this state, the Prophet (PBUH) commissioned 
him with the greatest mission of his life, which was to be his envoy to 
Al-Madiinah. His mission was to instruct the Ansaar who believed in 
the Prophet (PBUH) and had pledged their allegiance to him at 
~Aqabah, to call others to Islam, and to prepare Al-Madiinah for the 
day of the great Hijrah. There were among the Companions of the 
Prophet (PBUH) at that time others who were older than Mus*ab and 
more prominent and nearer to the Prophet (PBUH) by family 
relations. But the Prophet (PBUH) chose Mus*ab the Good, knowing 
that he was entrusting to him the most important task of that time, 
putting into his hands the destiny of Islam at Al-Madiinah. The 
radiant city of Al-Madiinah was destined to be the home of Hijrah, 
the springboard of Islamic preachers and the liberators of the future. 


Mus*ab was equal to the task and trust which Allah had given 
him and he was equipped with an excellent mind and noble character. 
He won the hearts of the Madinites with his piety, uprightness and 
sincerity. And so they embraced the religion of Allah in flocks. At the 
time the Prophet (PBUH) sent him there, only twelve Muslims had 
pledged allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH) at the Pledge of ~Aqabah. 
He had hardly completed a few months when they answered to the 
call of Allah and the Prophet (PBUH). During the next pilgrimage 
season, the Madinite Muslims sent a delegation of 70 believing men 
and women to Makkah to meet the Prophet (PBUH). 


They came with their teacher and their Prophet's envoy, Mus-ab 
Ibn ‘Umair. Mus*ab had proven, by his good sense and excellence, 
that the Prophet (PBUH) knew well how to choose his envoys and 
teachers. 


24 


Mus*ab had understood his mission well. He knew that he was 
a caller to Allah and preacher of His religion, which calls people to 
tight guidance and the straight path. Like the Prophet (PBUH) in 
whom he believed, he was no more than a deliverer of the message. 
There he stood fast, with Asad Ibn Zoraarah as host, and both of 
them used to visit the tribes, dwellings, and assemblies, reciting to the 
people what he had of the Book of Allah, instilling in them that Allah 
is no more than One God. 


He had confronted certain instances which could have put an 
end to his life and that of those with him but for his active, intelligent, 
great mind. One day, he was taken by surprise while preaching to the 
people to find Usaid Ibn Hudair, leader of the “Abd Al-Ashhal tribe, 
at Al-Madiinah confronting him with a drawn arrow. 


He was raging with anger and animosity against the one who 
had come to corrupt the religion of his people by telling them to 
abandon their gods and talking to them about the idea of only One 
God Whom they did not know before and had never heard of. Their 
gods were to them the center of their worship. Whenever any of them 
needed them, he knew their places. They would invoke them for help. 
That was how they thought and imagined! 


As for the God of Muhammad, to whom this envoy was calling, 
nobody knew His place, nor could anybody see Him! When the 
Muslims who were sitting around Mus‘ab, saw Usaid Ibn Hudair 
advancing in his unbridled anger, they were frightened, but Mus‘ab the 
Good stood firm. Usaid stood before him and As*ad Ibn Zoraarah 
shouting, “What brought you here? Are you coming to corrupt our 
faith? Go away if you wish to be saved !" 


And like the calmness of the sea and its force, Mus*ab started 
his fine speech saying, “Won't you sit down and listen? If you like 
our Cause, you can accept; and if you dislike it, we will spare you of 
what you hate." 


25 


Allah is the Greatest! How grand an opening whose ending 
would be pleasant! Usaid was a thoughtful and clever man, and here 
he saw Mus*ab inviting him to listen and no more. If he was 
convinced he would accept it, and if he was not convinced, then 
Musab would leave his neighborhood and his clan, and move to 
another neighborhood without harm, nor being harmed. There and 
then Usaid answered him saying, "Well, that is fair," and he dropped 
his arrow to the ground and sat down listening. 


Mus*ab had hardly read the Qur'aan, explaining the mission 
with which Muhammad Ibn “Abd Allah (PBUH) came, when the 
conscience of Usaid began to clear and brighten and change with the 
effectiveness of the words. He became overwhelmed by its beauty. 
When Mus‘ab finished speaking, Usaid Ibn Hudair exclaimed to him 
and those with him, "How beautiful is this speech, and how true! 
How can one enter this religion?" Musab told him to purify his body 
and clothes and say, "I bear witness that there is no god but Allah.” 


Usaid retired for some time and then returned pouring clean 
water on his head and standing there proclaiming, "I bear witness 
that there is no god but Allah, and that Muhammad is the Messenger 
of Allah." 


The news spread like lightning and then Sa‘d Ibn Mu*aadh came 
and listened to Mus*ab, and he was convinced and embraced Islam. 
Then came Sa*‘d Ibn *Ubaadah. 


There and then blessings came with their entering Islam. The 
people of Al-Madiinah came together asking one another,"If Usaid 
Ibn Hudair, Sa*d Ibn Mu'aadh and Sa*d Ibn “Ubaadah have embraced 
Islam, what are we waiting for? Go straight to Mus‘ab and believe. 
By Allah, he is calling us to the truth and the straight path!" 


The first envoy of the Prophet (PBUH) succeeded without 


26 


comparison. It was a success which he deserved and to which he was 
equal. 


The days and years passed by. The Prophet (PBUH) and his 
Companions emigrated to Al-Madiinah, and the Quraish were raging 
with envy and their ungodly pursuit after the pious worshippers. So 
the Battle of Badr took place, in which they were taught a lesson and 
lost their strong hold. After that they prepared themselves for 
revenge, and thus came the Battle of Uhud. The Muslims mobilized 
themselves, and the Prophet (PBUH) stood in their midst to sort out 
among their faithful faces and to choose one to bear the standard. He 
then called for Mus‘ab the Good, and he advanced and carried the 
standard. 


The terrible battle was raging, the fighting furious. The archers 
disregarded the orders of the Prophet (PBUH) by leaving their 
positions on the mountain when they saw the polytheists withdrawing 
as if defeated. But this act of theirs soon turned the victory of the 
Muslims to defeat. The Muslims were taken at unawares by the 
cavalry of the Quraish at the mountain top, and many Muslims were 
killed by the swords of the polytheists as a consequence. 


When they saw the confusion and horror splitting the ranks of 
the Muslims, the polytheists concentrated on the Prophet of Allah to 
finish him off. Mus*ab saw the impending threat, so he raised the 
standard high, shouting, “Allahu Akbar! Allah is the Greatest!" like 
the roar of a lion. He turned and jumped left and right, fighting and 
killing the foe. All he wanted was to draw the attention of the enemy 
to himself in order to turn their attention away from the Prophet 
(PBUH). He thus became as a whole army in himself. Nay, Mus*ab 
went alone to fight as if he were an army of giants raising the 
standard in sanctity with one hand, striking with his sword with the 


27 


other. But the enemies were multiplying on him. They wanted to step 
on his corpse so that they could find the Prophet (PBUH). 


Let us allow a living witness to describe for us the last scene of 
Mus*‘ab the Great. Ibn Sa‘d said: Ibraahiim Ibn Muhammad Ibn 
Sharhabiil Al--Abdriy related from his father, who said: Mus~ab Ibn 
‘Umair carried the standard on the Day of Uhud. When the Muslims 
were scattered, he stood fast until he met Ibn Qumaah who was a 
knight. He struck him on his right hand and cut it off, but Mus*ab 
said, "<and Muhammad is but a Messenger. Messengers have passed 
away before him >" (3:144). He carried the standard with his left 
hand and leaned on it. He struck his left hand and cut it off, and so 
he leaned on the standard and held it with his upper arms to his 
chest, all the while saying, "<And Muhammad is but a Messenger. 
Messengers have passed away before him >". Then a third one struck 
him with his spear, and the spear went through him. Mus‘ab fell and 
then the standard. 


Nay, the cream of martyrdom had fallen! He fell after he had 
struggled for the sake of Allah in the great battle of sacrifice and faith. 
He had thought that if he fell, he would be a stepping stone to the 
death of the Prophet (PBUH) because he would be without defense 
and protection. But he put himself in harm's way for the sake of the 
Prophet (PBUH). Overpowered by his fear for and love of him, he 
continued to say with every sword stroke that fell on him from the 
foe, "<And Muhammad is but a Messenger. Messengers have 
passed away before him >"(3:144). This verse was revealed later, 
after he had spoken it. 


After the bitter battle, they found the corpse of the upright 
martyr lying with his face in the dust, as if he feared to look while 
harm fell on the Prophet (PBUH). So he hid his face so that he would 


28 


avoid the scene. Or perhaps, he was shy when he fell as a martyr, 
before making sure of the safety of the Prophet of Allah, and before 
serving to the very end, guarding and protecting him. 


Allah is with you, O Mus‘ab | What a great life story! 


* * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions came to inspect the 
scene of the battle and bid farewell to its martyrs. Pausing at 
Mus*ab's body, many tears dripped from the Prophet's eyes. 


Khabbaab Ibn Al-Arat narrated: We emigrated with the 
Prophet (PBUH) for Allah's cause, so our reward became due with 
Allah. Some of us passed away without enjoying anything in this life 
of his reward, and one of them was Mus‘ab Ibn “Umair, who was 
martyred on the Day of Uhud. He did not leave behind anything 
except a sheet of shredded woolen cloth. If we covered his head with 
it, his feet were uncovered, and if we covered his feet with it, his head 
was uncovered. The Prophet (PBUH) said to us, "Cover his head with 
it and put lemon grass over his feet.” 


Despite the deep, sad pain which the Prophet (PBUH) suffered 
over the loss of his uncle Hamzah and the mutilation of his corpse by 
the polytheists in a manner that drew tears from the Prophet (PBUH) 
and broke his heart; despite the fact that the field of battle 
was littered with the corpses of his Companions, all of whom 
represented the peak of truth, piety and enlightenment; despite all 
this, he stood at the corpse of his first envoy, bidding him farewell 
and weeping bitterly. Nay, the Prophet (PBUH) stood at the remains 
of Musab Ibn “Umair saying, while his eyes were flowing with tears, 
love and loyalty, "<Among the believers are men who have been true 
to their covenant with Allah >" (33:23). 


29 


Then he gave a sad look at the garment in which he was 
shrouded and said, "I saw you at Makkah, and there was not a more 
precious jewel, nor more distinguished one than you, and here you are 
bare-headed in a garment!" Then the Prophet (PBUH) looked at all 
the martyrs in the battlefield and said, "The Prophet of Allah 
witnesses that you are martyrs to Allah on the Day of Resurrection." 
Then he gathered his living Companions around him and said, "O 
people, visit them, come to them, and salute them. By Allah, no 
Muslim will salute them but that they will salute him in return." 


* * * 


Peace be on you, O Mus‘ab. Peace be on you, O Martyrs. 
Peace and blessings of Allah be upon you! 


30 


(2) 
SALMAAN AL-FAARISIY 
The Seeker after Truth 


From Persia comes our hero this time, and from Persia many 
came to embrace Islam in the long run, and it made some of them 
extraordinary, unsurpassable in faith and knowledge in religion and 
worldly affairs. 


It is one of the wonders of Islam and its greatness that it never 
enters a country on Allah's earth but that it exerts invaluable influence 
on all its potentialities and forces, bringing forth the latent genius of 
its people and followers. From there came forth Muslim philosophers, 
physicians, jurists, astronomers, inventors, and mathematicians. 


Behold, they reached all heights, broke all frontiers, until the first 
era of Islam flourished with great geniuses in all fields of intellectual 
activity such as administration and science. Verily, they came from 
various nations, but their religion remained one. 


The Prophet (PBUH) had prophesied this blessed spread of his 
religion. Indeed, he had been so promised by his Almighty Lord. He 
had pointed to the time, place, and day, and he had seen in his 
mind's eye the banner of Islam fluttering in all corners of the earth and 
over the palaces of its earthly rulers. 


Salmaan Al-Faarisiy (The Persian) bore witness to this and was 
firmly connected with what happened. That was on the Day of Al- 
Khandaq (The Trench) in the year A.H. 5, when the leaders of the 
Jews approached Makkah to stir up the polytheists and form an 
alliance against the Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslims, asking the 
polytheists to enter upon a treaty for decisive battle to eradicate this 
new religion. 


31 


The ungodly war was planned: the Quraish army and allies 
would attack Al-Madiinah from outside, while the Bani Quraidhah 
would attack from within, behind the ranks of the Muslims, who 
would then fall prey and be crushed. One day the Prophet (PBUH) 
and the Muslims were taken unaware by a huge well-armed army 
marching on Al-Madiinah. The Qur'aan depicts the scene thus: 
<When they came against you from above you and from below you 
and your eyes turned away and your hearts reached to your throats, 
and you imagined vain thoughts about GOD; in that place the 
believers were tried and shaken most severely > (33:10-11). 


Twenty-four thousand fighters under the command of Abu 
Sufyaan and ~“Uyainah Ibn Hisn were advancing on Al-Madiinah to 
storm it and to lay siege to it in order to get rid of Muhammad, his 
religion, and his Companions. This army did not represent the 
Quraish alone, for they were in alliance with all the tribes, and all 
had vested interests that were threatened by Islam. It was a last and 
decisive attempt embarked on by all the enemies of the Prophet 
(PBUH), based upon individual, collective, and tribal interests. 


The Muslims found themselves in a precarious situation. The 
Prophet (PBUH) assembled his Companions for consultation. 
Certainly they were gathered to reach a decision on defense and 
battle, but how could they put up a defense? And then a long - legged 
man with flowing hair for whom the Prophet (PBUH) bore great love, 
Salmaan Al-Faarisiy, held up his head and took a look at Al- 
Madiinah, which was surrounded by hills, mountains, and exposed. 
open country which could be easily broken through by the enemy. 


Salmaan had much experience, in warfare and its tactics in his 
native Persia. So he proposed to the Prophet (PBUH) something 
which the Arabs had never seen before in warfare. It was the 
digging of a trench in the exposed places around Al-Madiinah. 


32 


And Allah knows what could have been the position of the 
Muslims in that battle had they not dug the trench, which was no 
Sooner seen by the Quraish than they were stunned by despair. The 
forces of the enemy still remained in their tents fora month, unable to 
take Al-Madiinah, until Allah sent them one night a storm which 
devastated their tents and tore them asunder. 


Then Abu Sufyaan announced to his forces that they should 
return to where they had come from. They were despondent and 
frustrated. 


During the excavation of the trench, Salmaan took his place 
among the Muslims while they dug and removed the sand. The 
Prophet (PBUH) was also taking part in digging where Salmaan was 
working in a group. Their pickaxes could not smash a stubborn rock, 
in spite of the fact that Salmaan was of strong build and hard- 
working. A single stroke of his would break a rock to pieces, but he 
stood in front of this stubborn one. He let all those around him try to 
break it, but in vain. Salmaan went to the Prophet (PBUH) to ask 
him to divert the trench around that stubborn and challenging rock. 


The Prophet (PBUH) returned with Salmaan to see the rock 
himself. When he saw it, he called for a pickax and asked the 
Companions to keep back from the splinters. He said, "In the name 
of Allah," and then raised his blessed, firm hands gripping the pickax 
and let it fall. 


The rock broke, making a great light. Salmaan said that he 
himself saw that light shining upon Al-Madiinah. The Prophet 
(PBUH) raised the pickax and gave a second blow and the rock broke 
more. At that moment the Prophet (PBUH) said loudly,"Allahu akbar 
— Allah is the Greatest — I have been given the keys to Rome; its red 
palaces have been lit for me and my nation has vanquished it.” 


33 


The Prophet (PBUH) struck his third blow. Then the rock 
shattered and its glittering light was seen! The Prophet (PBUH) told 
them that he was now looking at the palaces of Syria, Sanaa’ and 
others like them, and the cities of the world over which the banner of 
Islam would flutter one day. The Muslims shouted in deep faith, 
"This is what Allah and His Prophet have promised us!" 


Salmaan was the originator of the project to dig the trench, and 
he was associated with the rock out of which poured some secrets of 
the unseen and of destiny. When he called the Prophet (PBUH) to 
break it, he stood by the side of the Prophet (PBUH), saw the light, 
and heard the glad omen, and he lived to see the prophecy fulfilled 
and abided in its living reality. He saw the great capitals of Persia 
and Rome (Byzantium), the palaces of San‘aa’, Syria, Egypt, and Iraq. 
He saw every place trembling with the blessed ecstasy which was 
issuing forth from the high minarets in all parts of the world, 
spreading the light of guidance and goodness. 


And here he is sitting there in the shade of a tree before his 
house in Al-Madiinah telling his guests about his great adventures in 
the quest for truth, explaining to them how he abandoned the religion 
of his Persian people for Christianity and then for Islam. How he 
abandoned his father's wealth and estate and threw himself into the 
arms of the wilderness in the quest for the release of his tension and 
soul. How he was sold in a slave market on his way to search for 
truth. How he met with the Prophet (PBUH) and how he came to 
believe in him. Now let us approach his great court and listen to his 
grand tale which he is recounting. 


* * * 
I come from Isfahan, from a place called Jai, and I was the most 


beloved son of my father, who was a figure of high esteem among his 
people. We used to worship fire. I devoted myself to fire worship 


34 


until I became custodian of the fire which we lit and never allowed to 
be extinguished. 


My father had an estate. One day, he sent me there. I passed by 
a Christian church and heard them praying. I went in and saw what 
they were doing. I was impressed by what I saw in their prayers. I 
said, “This is better than our religion." I did not leave them until 
sunset, nor did I go to my father's estate, nor did I return to my father 
until he sent people to search for me. 


I asked the Christians about their affair and prayers which 
impressed me, and about the origin of their religion. They answered, 
"In Syria." I said to my father when I returned to him, "I passed by 
people praying in a church of theirs, and I was impressed by their 
prayer, and I could see that their religion is better than ours.” He 
questioned me and | questioned him, and then he put fetters on my 
feet and locked me up. 


Then I sent to the Christians saying I had entered their religion, 
and I requested that whenever a caravan came from Syria, they should 
tell me before its return in order for me to travel with them, and so 
they did. 


I broke loose from the iron fetters and went away. I set out with 
them for Syria. While I was there, I asked about their learned man, 
and I was told that he was the bishop, leader of the church. I went to 
him and told him my story. I lived with him, serving, praying, and 
learning. 

But this bishop was not faithful in his religion, because he used 
to gather money from the people to distribute it, but he would keep it 
for himself. Then he died. 


They appointed anew leader in his place. I have never seen a 


35 


man more godly than he in his religion, nor more active in his bid for 
the Hereafter, nor more pious in the world, nor more punctual at 
worship. I loved him more than I had ever loved any other person 
before. 


When his fate came, I asked him, "To whom would you 
recommend me? And to whom would you leave me?” He said, "O 
my son, I do not know anyone who is on the path Tam and who leads 
the kind of life I lead, except a certain man in Mosul.” 


When he died, I went to that man in Mosul, and told him the 
story, and I stayed with him as long as Allah wished me to stay. 
Then death approached him. So I asked him, "To whom would you 
advise me to go to?" He directed me to a pious man in Nisiibiin." So I 
went to him and told him my story. I stayed with him as long as 
Allah wished me to stay. When death overtook him, I asked him as 
before. He told me to meet a person at “Amuriah in Byzantium. So, 
to Byzantium I went and stayed with that man, earrting my living 
there by rearing cattle and sheep. 


Then death approached him, and I asked him, "To whom 
should I go?" He said, “O my son, I know no one anywhere who is on 
the path we have been on so that I can tell you to go to him. But you 
have been overtaken by an epoch in which there will appear a prophet 
in the pure creed of Ibraahiim (Abraham). He will migrate to the place 
of palm trees. If you can be sincere to him, then do so. He has signs 
which will be manifested: he does not eat of charity, yet he accepts 
gifts, and between his shoulders is the seal of prophethood. When 
you see him, you will know him." 


A caravan passed by me on that day. I asked them where they 
had come from and learned that they were from the Arabian 
Peninsula. So I told them, "I give you these cattle and sheep of mine in 
return for your taking me to your land." They agreed. So they took 


36 


me in their company until they brought me to Wadi Al-Quraa and 
there they wronged to me. They sold me to a Jew. I saw many palm 
trees and cherished the hope that it was the land that had been 
described to me and which would be the future place of the advent of 
the prophet, but it was not. 


I stayed with this Jew who bought me until another from Bani 
Quraidhah came to him one day and bought me from him. I stayed 
with him until we came to Al-Madiinah. By Allah, I had hardly seen 
it when I knew that it was the land described to me. 


I stayed with the Jew, working for him on his plantation in Bani 
Quraidhah until Allah sent His Prophet, who later emigrated to Al- 
Madiinah and dismounted at Qubaa’ among the Bani ‘Amr Ibn ‘Awf. 
Indeed, one day, I was at the top of a palm tree with my master 
sitting below it when a Jewish man came. He was a cousin of his and 
said to him, "May Allah destroy Bani Qubaa’, They are spreading a 
rumor about a man at Qubaa' who came from Makkah claiming that 
he is a prophet." By Allah, he had hardly said it, when I was seized 
by a tremor, and the palm tree shook until I almost fell on my master. 
I climbed down quickly saying, "What are you saying? What news?" 
My master gave me a nasty slap and said, "What have you got to do 
with this? Return to your work!" 


So, I returned to work. At nightfall I gathered what I had and 
went out until came to the Prophet (PBUH) at Qubaa'. I entered 
and found him sitting with some of his Companions. Then I said, 
"You are in need and a stranger. I have some food which I intend to 
give out as charity. When they showed me your lodgings, I thought 
you most deserve it, so I have come to you with it." I put the food 
down. The Prophet (PBUH) said to his Companions, "Eat in the 
name of Allah." He abstained and never took of it. I said to myself, 
"This, by Allah, is one sign. He does not eat of charity!" 


37 


I returned to meet the Prophet (PBUH) again the next day, 
carrying some food, and said to him (PBUH), "I can see that you do 
not partake of charity. I have something which I want to give to you 
as a present." I placed it before him. He said to his Companions, 
"Eat in the name of Allah" and he ate with them. So I said to myself, 
"This indeed is the second sign. He eats of presents." I returned and 
stayed away for a while. Then I came to him, and I saw him sitting, 
having returned from a burial, and surrounded by his Companions. 
He had two garments, carrying one on his shoulder and wearing the 
other. I greeted him, then bent to see the upper part of his back. He 
knew what I was looking for, so he threw aside his garment off his 
shoulder and, behold, the sign between his shoulders, the seal of 
Prohethood, was clear just as the Christian monk had described." 


At once, I staggered towards him, kissing him and weeping. He 
called to me to come forward and I sat before him. I told him my 
story as you have already heard me describe the events. 


When I became a Muslim, slavery prevented me from taking part 
in the battles of Badr and Uhud. Therefore the Prophet (PBUH) 
advised me, "Go into terms with your master for him to free you," and 
so I did. The Prophet (PBUH) told the Companions to assist me, and 
Allah freed me from bondage. I became a free Muslim, taking part 
with the Prophet (PBUH) in the Battle of Al-Khandaq and others. 


With these simple clear words, Salmaan spoke of his great, 
noble, and sacrificial adventure for the sake of Allah, seeking after the 
reality of religion that led him to Allah and helped him to find his role 
in this life. 


What kind of a noble person was this man? What great 
superiority was achieved by his aspiring spirit, that restless spirit that 
withstood difficulties and defeated them, confronted the impossible 
and it gave way! What devotion to the truth, and what sincerity that 


38 


led its owner voluntarily away from the estate of his father, with all 
its wealth and luxury, to the wilderness, with all its difficulties and 
suffering. He moved from land to land, town to town, seeking 
acquaintances, persevering, worshiping and searching for his destiny 
among people, sects, and different ways of life. And adhering all the 
way to the truth with all its noble sacrifices, for the sake of guidance 
until he was sold into slavery. He was then rewarded by Allah the 
best of rewards, making him reach the truth and come into the 
presence of His Prophet. And then He granted him longevity, enough 
for him to see the banner of Islam fluttering in all parts of the world 
and His Muslim worshippers filling its space and corners with 
guidance, progress and justice! 


What do you expect of the Islam of a man with such a noble 
character but to be a man of such truth! It was an Islam of the God- 
fearing and innocent. In his devotion he was intelligent, pious, and the 
person nearest to “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab. 


He once stayed with Abu Ad-Dardaa’, under the same roof. 
Abu Ad-Dardaa' used to pray all night and fast all day. Salmaan 
blamed him for this excessive worship. One day, Salmaan wanted to 
stop him from fasting and to say it was supererogatory. Abu Ad- 
Dardaa' asked him, “Would you prevent me from fasting for my 
Lord and from praying to Him?" Salmaan replied, "No, your eyes 
have a claim upon you, your family has a claim upon you, so fast 
intermittently, then pray and sleep." 


This reached the Prophet (PBUH) who said, "Salmaan is, 
indeed, full of knowledge." The Prophet (PBUH) was often impressed 
by his wisdom and knowledge, just as he was impressed by his 
character and religion. On the Day of Al-Khandaq the Ansaar stood 
up and said, “Salmaan is of us," the Muhaajiruun stood up also and 
said, “Salmaan is of us." The Prophet called to them saying, "Salmaan 
is of us, O People of the House (Prophet's house)." 


39 


Indeed, he deserved this honor! ~Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib , (May 
Allah honor his face) nicknamed him "Luqmaan the Wise”. He was 
asked about after his death: "There was a man who was of the 
People of the House. Who among you is like Luqmaan the Wise? He 
was a man of knowledge who absorbed all the scriptures of the 
People of the Book. He was like a sea that was never exhausted!" 


He was held in the minds of Prophet's Companions with all 
highest regards and in the greatest position and respect. During the 
Caliphate of “Umar, he came to Al-Madiinah on a visit and “Umar 
accorded him what he had never accorded to anyone before when he 
assembled his Companions and said, "Come, let us go out and 
welcome Salmaan!" They received him at the border of Al-Madiinah. 


Salmaan had lived with the Prophet (PBUH) ever since he met 
him, and believed in him as a free Muslim, and worshiped with him. 
He lived during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr, “Umar and *Uthmaan, in 
whose era he met his Lord. In most of these years, the banner of Islam 
spread everywhere, and the treasures of Islam were carried to Al- 
Madiinah in floods and distributed to the people in the form of 
regular allowance and fixed salaries. The responsibilities of ruling 
increased on all fronts, as well as duties and the overwhelming burden 
of holding official posts. So where did Salmaan stand in this respect? 
Where do we see him in the time of splendor, plenty, and enjoyment? 


+ * * 


Open wide your eyes. Do you see that humble man sitting there 
in the shade making baskets and utensils out of palm fronds? 


That is Salmaan. Take a good look at him. Look at his short 
garment, which is so short that it is only down to his knees. That was 
him in grand old age. His grant was 4,000 to 6,000 dirhams a year, 
but he distributed all of it, refusing to take a dirham of it, and he 


40 


used to say, "I would buy palm fronds with one dirham to work on 
and then sell it for three dirhams. I retained one dirham of it as 
capital, spent one dirham on my family, and gave away one dirham, 
and if ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab prevented me from that, I would not 
stop." 


What next, O followers of Muhammad? What next, O noblest 
of mankind in all ages? Some of us used to think, whenever we heard 
the conduct of the Companions and their piety —for example, Abu 
Bakr, ‘Umar, Abu Dhar and their brethren — that it was based on the 
life of the Arabian Peninsula, where the Arabs find pleasure in 
simplicity. And here we are before a man from Persia, the land of 
Pleasure, luxury, and civilization, and he was not of the poor but of 
its upper class. What about him now refusing property, wealth, and 
enjoyment, and insisting that he live on one dirham a day from the 
work of his hands? How about his refusing leadership and position 
except for something relating to jihaad and only if none but he were 
suitable for it, and it was forced upon him, and he accepted it 
weeping and shy? How about when he accepted leadership which 
was forced upon him but he refused to take his lawful dues? 
Hishaam Ibn Hasaan relates from Al-Hassan: The allowance of 
Salmaan was 5,000. He lived among 30,000 people and used to 
dress in a garment cut into halves. He wore one and sat on the other 
half. Whenever his allowance was due him, he distributed it to the 
needy and lived on the earnings of his hands! 


Why do you think he was doing all this work and worshiping 
with all this devotion, and yet he was a Persian child of luxury, the 
upbringing of civilization? You can hear the reply from him. While he 
was on his deathbed, the great spirit mounting forth to meet his Lord, 
Exalted and Merciful, Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqaas went to greet him, and 
Salmaan wept! Sa‘d said, "What makes you weep, O Abu ‘Abd 


41 


Allah? The Prophet of Allah died pleased with you!" Salmaan 
replied, "By Allah, I am not weeping in fear of death, nor for love of 
the world. But the Prophet of Allah put me on an oath. He said, ‘Let 
any of you have in this world like the provision of the traveler,’ and 
here I have owned many things around me." Sa‘d said: I looked 
around, and | saw nothing but a water-pot and vessel to eat in! Then 
I said to him, "O Abu “Abd Allah, give us a parting word of advice 
for us to follow." He said, O Sa'd, remember Allah for your cares, if 
you have any. Remember Allah in your judgment, if you judge. 
Remember Allah when you distribute the share." This was the man 
who filled his spirit with riches just as it filled him with renunciation 
of the pleasures of this world, its riches, and pride. The oath which 
he and the rest of the Companions had taken before the Prophet of 
Allah was that they must not let the world possess them and that 
they should take nothing from it but the provision of the traveler in his 
bag. 


Salmaan had kept the oath, yet still his tears ran when he saw 
his soul preparing for departure, fearing that he had gone beyond the 
limits. There was nothing around him except a vessel to eat in and a 
water-pot, and yet still he considered himself lavish! Did I not tell 
you that he was the nearest in resemblance to “Umar? During the 
days of his rule over the Madiinah area, he never changed his way. 
He had refused, as we have seen, to receive his salary as a ruler, but 
went on making baskets to earn his living. His dress was no more 
than a gown, resembling his old clothes in simplicity. 


One day while on the road, he met a man arriving from Syria, 
carrying a load of figs and dates. The load was too heavy for him 
and made him weary. No sooner did the Syrian see the man in front 
of him, who appeared to be one of the common people and poor than 
he thought of putting the load on his shoulders and when he reached 
his destination he would give him something for his labor. So he 
beckoned to the man (Salmaan, the governor), and he came up to him. 


42 


The Syrian said to him, "Relieve me of this load." He carried it, and 
they walked together. 


While on their way, they met a group of people. He greeted 
them and they stood up in obeisance, replying, "And unto the 
governor be peace!" "Who is the governor?” The Syrian asked himself. 
His surprise increased when he saw some of them rushing towards 
Salmaan to take the load off his shoulders. "Let us carry it, O 
governor". When the Syrian knew that he was the governor of Al- 
Madiinah, he was astonished. Words of apology and regret fell from 
his lips, and he went forward to grab the load. But Salmaan shook 
his head in refusal, saying, "No, not until I take you to your 
destination." 


He was asked one day, "What troubles you in the leadership?" 
He replied, "The pleasure of nurturing it and the bitterness of 
meaning!" 


A friend of his came to him one day at his house and found him 
kneading dough. He asked him, "Where is your servant? "He replied, 
"We have sent her on an errand and we hate to charge her with two 
duties.” 


When we say "his house" let us remember what kind of house it 
was. When Salmaan thought of building it, he asked the mason, 
"How are you going to build it?" The mason was courteous and yet 
witty. He knew the piety and devotion of Salmaan, so he replied to 
him saying, "Fear not. It is a house for you to protect yourself against 
the heat of the sun and dwell in the cold weather. When you stand 
erect in it, it touches your head.” Salmaan said to him, "Yes, that is it, 
so go on and build it." 


43 


There was nothing of the goods of this world which could 
attract Salmaan for a moment, nor did they leave any traces in his 
heart except one thing, which he was particularly mindful of and had 
entrusted to his wife, requesting her to keep it far away in a safe 
place. In his last sickness, and in the morning on which he gave up his 
soul, he called her, “Bring me the trust which I left in safe keeping!" 
She brought it and behold, it was a bottle of musk. He had gained it 
on the day of liberating the city of Jalwalaa' and kept it to be his 
perfume on the day of his death. Then he called for a pot of water, 
sprinkled the musk into it, stirred it with his hand and then said to 
his wife, "Sprinkle it on me, for there will now come to me creatures 
from the creatures of Allah. They do not eat food and what they like 
is perfume." 


Having done so he said to her, “Shut the door and go down." 
She did what he bade her to do. After a while she went up to him 
and saw his blessed soul had departed his body and his frame. It 
was gone to the Supreme Master, and it ascended with the desire to 
meet Him as he had an appointment there with the Prophet 
Muhammad (PBUH) and his two Companions Abu Bakr and ‘Umar 
and the noble circle of martyrs! 


* * * 


Long had the burning desire stirred Salmaan. The time had 
come for him to rest in peace. 


44 


(3) 
ABU DHAR AL-GHIFAARIY 
The Leader of Opposition and an Enemy of Wealth 


Cheerfully and happily did he turn toward Makkah. Indeed, 
the difficulty of his journey and the hard, burning desert sand made 
him suffer pain. However, the goal he was striving to reach made him 
forget his pain and filled his soul with joy and delight. 


He entered Makkah disguised as one of those who came to 
circumambulate the great idols of the Sacred House of the Ka‘bah or 
as a passer-by who had lost his way or who had traveled far and 
sought provision and shelter. 


If the inhabitants of Makkah knew that he had come to search 
for Muhammad (PBUH) and to listen to him, they would cut him into 
pieces. He did not fear being cut up piece by piece, but not before 
meeting the person he had crossed the hot burning deserts to see and 
for whose sake afterwards he was willing to risk his life because he 
believed in him and was convinced of his honesty and the truth of his 
message. 


He went about secretly gathering information and whenever he 
heard someone speaking about Muhammad (PBUH), he carefully 
approached him until he was finally able to compile all the scattered 
pieces of information which he had heard here and there. Finally, he 
was guided to the place where he was able to see Muhammad 
(PBUH). 


One morning he went there and found the Prophet (PBUH) 
sitting alone. He approached him and said, "O my Arab brother, 
good morning.” Thereupon the Prophet replied, "And may peace be 
upon you, my brother." Abu Dhar then said, "Sing to me some of 
what you are saying." The Prophet (PBUH) answered, "It isn'ta 
poem to be sung, but a Holy Qur'aan." Abu Dhar said, "Then recite 
for me." 


45 


The Prophet (PBUH) recited to him while he listened. It was not 
long until Abu Dhar shouted, "I bear witness that there is no god but 
Allah and that Muhammad is His Prophet (PBUH) and Messenger." 
The Prophet (PBUH) asked him, "Where are you from, my Arab 
brother?" Abu Dhar answered, "From Ghifaar." A broad smile 
appeared on the Prophet's lips (PBUH) and his face was filled with 
wonder and astonishment. 


However, Abu Dhar was also smiling, for he knew well that the 
reason behind the Prophet's astonishment was because the man who 
had just embraced Islam in front of him was from Ghifaar. Ghifaar 
was a tribe with a notorious reputation for highway robbery. Its 
people were famous for theft and were known as allies of darkness 
and night. Woe to him who fell into their hands on a dark night! 


Was it possible that one of them would embrace Islam while it 
was still a new, secret religion? 


Narrating the story himself, Abu Dhar said: The Prophet 
(PBUH) lifted his eyes out of astonishment, due to Ghifaar's 
reputation. Then he said, "Allah guides whom He wills." Indeed, 
Allah guides whom He wills. 


Abu Dhar (May Allah be pleased with him) was one of those 
whom Allah wanted to be rightly guided and for whom He wanted 
the best. His insight was always directed towards truth. 


It has been narrated that he worshiped Allah during the period 
of Jaahiliyah, which means that he revolted against the worship of 
idols and turned towards the belief in One Great Creator. 


Therefore, he had hardly heard about the appearance of a 
prophet rejecting idols and their worship and calling to the worship 
of Allah, the One, the Sublime, the Vanquisher, when he immediately 
set out and quickened his steps to meet this new Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH). 


46 


Immediately, without hesitation, he embraced Islam. His order 
among the converts was fifth or sixth, which means that he 
converted during the first days, if not the first hours, of Islam. His 
conversion was indeed very early. 


When he embraced Islam the Prophet (PBUH) was till secretly 
whispering the call to Islam to himself and to the five who believed in 
him. Abu Dhar could not do anything except carry his faith within 
his heart, secretly leaving Makkah and returning to his people. 


However, Abu Dhar — his real name was Jundub Ibn 
Janaadah ---- had a restless and agitated temper. He had been 
created to revolt against falsehood wherever it existed. Now he saw 
falsehood with his own eyes as lifeless rocks piled upon each other. 
The birth of their worship was long before his existence: minds and 
foreheads bowed down in front of them and people calling to them 
saying, "At your service, at your service!" 


It is true that he saw the Prophet's preference to whisper in 
those days, but he wished that a loud shout declaring Islam publicly 
be made by the venerable and honorable followers before his 
departure. 


Immediately after embracing Islam, he turned to the Prophet 
(PBUH) with the following question: "O Messenger of Allah, what is 
it that you order me?" The Prophet (PBUH) replied, "Go back to your 
kin until my order reaches you." Abu Dhar said, "In the name of the 
One Who owns my soul between His hands, I am not going back until 
Icry out loudly declaring Islam within the mosque!" 


Did I not tell you? His temper was restless and agitated. At the 
same moment when Abu Dhar discovered a totally new world, a 
wonderful new world represented by the Prophet (PBUH) whom he 
believed in and by the call which he became acquainted with by the 
Prophet's tongue, at that same moment he was asked to return 
silently to his kin. Was that possible? It was beyond his ability. 


47 


Hereupon, he entered the Sacred House and cried out as loud 
as he could, "I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that 
Muhammad is His Messenger!" 


As far as we know, it was the first public pronouncement 
declaring Islam and challenging the arrogance of the Quraish which 
reached their ears. It was cried out by a stranger who did not have 
any relatives, reputation, or protection in Makkah. 


He acted out of his own dedication and courage even though he 
knew what was going to happen. He was surrounded by the 
polytheists, who hit him till he fell down. 


This news reached Al “Abbaas, the Prophet's uncle. He came 
quickly but could not rescue Abu Dhar except by a clever trick. Thus 
he told them, "O you Quraish! You are merchants and your route 
crosses over Ghifaar and this man here is one of their tribesmen. 
Beware, he may incite his kin against you, provoking them to rob your 
caravans while passing by." They came back to their senses and left 
him alone. 


Having tasted the sweetness of being hurt in the cause of Allah, 
Abu Dhar did not want to leave Makkah without being given more. 


So, on the next day, or perhaps on the same day, Abu Dhar 
encountered two women circling around two idols (Usaaf and 
Naa‘ilah) and calling upon them. He stood in front of them rudely 
disgracing their idols. The women shouted loudly, and men hastened 
as fast as lightening, immediately hitting him until he fell down 
unconscious. 


When he regained consciousness he shouted again that there is 
no god but Allah and Muhammed (PBUH) is His Messenger. 


The Prophet (PBUH) realized the nature of his new disciple 
and his amazing ability to encounter falsehood. However, the time 
for public declaration of the message had not yet come, so again he 


48 


ordered Abu Dhar to go back to his kin and whenever he heard the 
announcement of the new religion, he would play his role. 


* * * 


Abu Dhar returned to his kin and tribe, telling them about the 
Prophet (PBUH) who called people to worship only Allah and who 
guided them to noble manners. His people embraced Islam one by 
one. Bani Ghifaar alone did not suffice him; he turned to Bani Aslim, 
to spread his lights there. 


Time passed and the Prophet (PBUH) emigrated to Al- 
Madiinah and there, together with Muslims, he settled down. 


One day the city welcomed long lines of people on horseback 
and on foot. Their feet made a great noise. Were it not for their 
loud shout "Allah is the Greatest", the viewer would have thought it 
was an attacking polytheist army. The great parade approached 
and entered Al-Madiinah. Their destination was the Prophet's 
(PBUH) Mosque. The parade consisted of two tribes , Bani Ghifaar 
and Bani Aslim. Abu Dhar made them come as Muslims, all of 
them: men, women, elderly, youth, and even the children! 


No doubt, the Prophet's wonder and astonishment increased. 
In the distant past he had been very astonished when he witnessed 
one of the tribe of Ghifaar announce his embracement of Islam, and he 
had expressed on that day his wonder saying, "Allah guides whom 
He wills." 


But now, the whole tribe had come after already becoming 
Muslim. It had lived several years under the banner of Islam since 
Allah guided it by means of Abu Dhar. Now it had come together 
with Bani Aslim. 


The former allies of the devil, the notorious highwaymen, had 
become the allies of truth and great men of good deeds. 


49 


Is it not true that Allah guides whom He pleases? The Prophet 
(PBUH) looked at their kind faces with eyes full of joy, tenderness, 
and love. He looked at Bani Ghifaar and said, "May Allah forgive 
Ghifaar." Then he turned to Bani Aslim and said, "May Allah make 
peace with Aslim." 


Abu Dhar, this magnificent propogator of Islam who was 
obstinate, unyielding, and difficult to be defeated: was the Prophet 
(PBUH) not going to salute him with a special greeting? 


Indeed, his reward was going to be abundant and his greeting 
blessed. He was going to carry on his chest- but also his history was 
going to carry - the highest, most honorable, and most respectable 
medals. Generations and centuries will pass away, but the Prophet's 
opinion about Abu Dhar will always stay alive in people's memory: 
“The earth never carried above it, nor did the sky ever shade under it 
a more truthful tongue than Abu Dhar's”. 


* * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) determined his Companion's future and 
summed up his whole life in those simple words. 


Bold and daring truthfulness was the essence of Abu Dhar's 
whole life. Truthfulness of his inner soul as well as his appearance. 
Truthfulness of his faith as well as his tongue. All his life he was 
truthful. Neither deceiving himself or anyone else, nor allowing 
anyone to deceive him. 


His truthfulness was not mute merit. According to Abu Dhar, 
truthfulness is never silent. Truthfulness is equivalent to openness 
and publicity, publicity of truth and challenge to falsehood, support 
of right and refutation of wrong. Truthfulness is a reasonable ally to 
truth and a courageous expression of it; both quicken their pace. 


The Prophet (PBUH) could see with his unmistaken insight— 
across remote distances and the far unknown future — all the 
different difficulties Abu Dhar had to face due to his truthfulness 


50 


and firmness. He therefore was always ordering him to let patience 
and deliberateness be his manner. 


The Prophet once asked him, "O Abu Dhar! What would you 
do if you witnessed a time when commanders monopolize the war 
booty?" He replied, "I swear by Allah Who sent you with the truth, I 
would strike them with my sword!" The Prophet (PBUH) said to 
him, "Shall I guide you to what is better? Be patient till you meet me." 


Why did the Prophet (PBUH) ask him this specific question? 
Commanders, money? It was the cause Abu Dhar was going to 
devote his life to and the problem he was to encounter with society 
in the future. 


The Prophet (PBUH) knew it; therefore he asked him this 
question in order to provide him with this precious advice: "Be 
patient till you meet me." 


Abu Dhar kept his teacher and Prophet's instruction 
unforgotten. Therefore, he did not carry a sword against those 
commanders who enriched themselves by taking what was the public 
money. But also, he did not keep silent, and he did not let them rest. 


Indeed, although the Prophet (PBUH) had forbidden him to 
carry his sword against them, he did not forbid him to carry a sharp 
truthful tongue. And that is what he did. 


* * * 


The era of the Prophet (PBUH) and of Abu Bakr and *Umar 
passed with its complete transcendence over all worldly temptations. 
Even the tempted desirous and greedy souls could not find a paved 
and open way for their devious desires. In those days there were no 
deviations to be oppossed loudly by Abu Dhar's sharp words. As 
long as the Commander of the Faithful “Umar lived, Muslim 
governors, rulers, and even the wealthy, were forced to live a humble, 
modest, aesthetic and just life, almost beyond human capacity. 
No governor of the Caliph, whether in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, or 


51 


anywhere else in the region, could ever eat a kind of sweet 
unaffordable by ordinary people without such a piece of information 
soon reaching “Umar, who would immediately order that governor to 
return to Al-Madiinah, where he would face a severe punishment. 


Therefore, Abu Dhar lived without trouble and happily, with 
much inward peace, as long as ‘Umar was Commander of the 
Faithful. Nothing ever annoyed Abu Dhar more than the abuse of 
power and the monopoly of wealth. ‘Umar's firm control over power 
and his fair distribution of wealth allowed him tranquility and 
satisfaction. 


Tt was because of this that he was able to devote himself to 
Allah's worship and jihaad in the cause of Allah, never keeping 
silent if any infringement was seen here or there, which rarely 
happened. 


However, the greatest, most just and most magnificent ruler 
that human beings were ever to experience left our world one day, 
leaving behind a tremendous gap, causing inevitable reactions 
beyond human expectations. 


The Islamic campaigns continued, thus bringing under control 
more regions. At the same time, desires and longing for ambition to 
enjoy the comforts and luxury of life started to float to the surface. 
In these events, Abu Dhar saw the impending danger. The banners 
of personal glory were about to tempt those whose role in life was to 
lift the standard of Allah. Life with its false embellishments and its 
wild arrogance was about to tempt those whose role was to make out 
of life a plantation of good deeds. 


Money — created by Allah to be obedient to His servants for 
the benefit of mankind — was about to turn into a tyrant master. A 
master of whom? The Prophet's Companions. 


The Prophet (PBUH) died with a pawned shield, although piles 
of war booty were under his service. The excellence of the earth — 
created by Allah for all human beings and with their rights upon it 


52 


mutually corresponding — was about to turn into a monopoly and 
privilege. ; 


Power — a responsibility that pious people tremble at when 
thinking about its horrible charge in the Hereafter — turned into a 
means of authority, wealth, and destructive juxury. 


Abu Dhar realized all that. He did not search for his duties or 
responsibilities, but rather took his sword, waved it in the air and set 
out to face his society with his unbeatable sword. But soon the echo 
of the Prophet's (PBUH) advice struck his heart, so he returned it to 
its scabbard. He remembered the Prophet (PBUH) had said he 
should not lift it in the face of a Muslim. 


< It is not lawful for a believer to kill another believer except 
byerror > (4: 92). 


His role was not to fight but to oppose. The sword was not a 
means of change and reformation, but the truthful, sincere, and brave 
word was. The fair word does not lose its path, and its 
consequences are not terrifying. The Prophet (PBUH) once said, while 
surrounded by his Companions, that the earth never carried above it, 
nor did the sky ever shade a more truthful tongue than Abu Dhar's. 


Why should someone who owns such a truthful tongue and 
truthful conviction need a sword ? 


A single word by him hit the target more than uncountable 
swords. Therefore, Abu Dhar was to encounter all the governors, the 
wealthy, and all those who worshipped the worldly life and relied 
upon it, thereby representing an even greater danger to the religion 
which came to be a guide, not a tax collector; prophethood, not 
dominion; mercy, not afflication; humbleness, not superiority; 
equality, not differentiation; satisfaction, not greed; sufficiency, not 
luxury and a life of ease full of temptation, with this life the only 
goal. 


53 


So Abu Dhar went out to face all those challenges, and Allah 
will judge truthfully between him and them, and Allah is the Most 
Just of Judges. 


Abu Dhar went out to the strongholds of power and wealth, 
attacking them one after the other. Within a short time he became the 
standard around which the laborers of Islam and the masses 
gathered. Even in the remote districts where people had not yet met 
him, word about him got around and he became well known until he 
hardly passed through a land in which his name had not reached the 
ears of some of the people and without crucial questions being raised 
which threatened the welfare and worldly interests of the powerful 
and wealthy. 


If this honorable, rebellious Companion was to select an 
appropriate standard for himself and his movement, he would not 
find a better one than an iron, a glowing, hot, and flaming iron. Thus 
he turned the following words into his chant and earnest appeal, 
repeating them every time and every place he went. People repeated 
them after him as if they were an anthem : 


Announce to those who hoard up gold and silver, the 
warning of branding irons with which their foreheads 
and bodies will be branded in the hereafter. 


He never ascended a mountain or descended a valley or entered 
a city or faced a ruler without repeating the same words, so much so 
that people would always welcome him when he approached them 
by repeating "Announce to those who hoard up gold and silver, the 
warning of branding irons." 


This statement turned into "signature time” for his message to 
which he devoted his life. That was because he saw wealth being 
accumulated and monopolized for power and being turned into a 
means of supremacy and abuse. He saw an overwhelming passion 


54 


for life which was about to erase all beauty, piety, devotion, and 
sincerity built up during the previous years of the great mission of the 
Messenger of Allah. 


When he began his attack, he started with the most 
authoritative and horrible stronghold: there in Syria, where 
Mu‘aawiyah Ibn Abi Sufyaan was ruling one of the most fertile lands 
in the world of Islam, granting and distributing money carelessly, 
thereby bestowing undeserved privileges upon people of power and 
rank in order to guarantee his future, a future he aspired to promote. 


There in Syria, the country of overwhelming palaces, country 
estates and fortunes which tempted the remnants of the carriers of 
the Islamic message, he began his attack. Abu Dhar wanted to 
confront the center of danger before it ruined and destroyed all 
Muslims. 


The leader of the opposition to corrupt worldly power wore his 
humble gown and hastened as fast as lightning towards Syria. 
Ordinary people hardly heard about his arrival before they hurried to 
welcome him with great enthusiasm and longing desire, surrounding 
him wherever he would go or stay. "O Abu Dhar, please tell us . . . O, 
Companion of the Prophet (PBUH) please tell us..." 


Sharp-eyed, he would take a glance at the multitude around 
him, seeing the majority of them suffering from poverty and need. 
He then directed his eyes to a place not too far away where he saw 
many palaces and landed estates. Then he shouted to those around 
him, "I wonder why those who don't find something to eat don't go 
out holding their swords ready to fight?" 


Then he immediately remembered the Prophet's admonition to 
replace opposition and rebellion with patience, and to replace the 
sword with brave and daring words, abandoning the language of war 
and returning to logic, reason, and conviction; teaching people that 
they are all equal like the teeth of a comb; that they are all partners as 
far as the means of living are concerned; that no one is superior to 
another except in piety; and that their ruler should be the first to 


55 


starve if the people suffer hunger and the last to satisfy his appetite 
if they become sated. 


He decided to create by means of his words and bravery a 
public opinion all over the Muslim countries which would represent, 
through its intelligence, indomitability, and strength, a hindering force 
to the deviations of the rulers and the rich and wealthy, in order to 
hinder the appearance and spread of a power- and wealth- 
monopolizing class. 


Within a few days, the whole of Syria turned into what 
resembled a bee-hive which had found its queen. 
If Abu Dhar would have given the slightest passing gesture of revolt, 
the whole of Syria would have been set on fire. But, as mentioned 
before, he focused his interest on creating a respectable public 
opinion. His words turned into the subject of conversation 
everywhere, inside mosques, during meetings, and even on roads. 


Danger increased and reached its peak for Abu Dhar, speaking 
about the newly acquired privileges of the rich and powerful, on 
the day in which be argued with Mu‘aawiyah in front of the masses. 


Every witness of that debate told those whe missed it, so that 
its news spread as fast as wildfire. 


Abu Dhar, who possessed the most truthful tongue on earth, as 
the Prophet (PBUH) described him, stood up. He asked Mu*aawiyah 
about his wealth before and after being in power, about the house in 
which he was living in Makkah, and the castles he owned in Syria. 
Then he raised the question to the Companions who had 
accompanied Mu‘aawiyah to Syria and were now owners of estates 
and castles. 


After that he cried to them, "Is it you among whom the Prophet 
lived when the Qur'aan was being revealed?" Then he answered 
himself, "Yes, it is you! The Qur'aan was revealed among you. It is 
you who experienced with the Prophet (PBUH) all the different 
scenes. 


56 


Then he asked them again, "Can't you find this verse in the 
Book of Allah? <... and those who hoard up gold and silver, and do 
not expend it in the cause of GOD, announce to them a painful 
chastisment —On the Day when it shall be heated in the Fire of 
Hell, and with it their foreheads, and their bodies, and their backs 
shall be branded, "This is what you treasured for yourselves, so taste 
the evil of what you were treasuring ." > (9: 34-35). 


However, Mu‘aawiyah wanted to end the whole dispute by 
arguing that this verse was mentioned regarding the People of the 
Book (i.e. the Jews and Christians). Hereupon cried Abu Dhar, "No, 
it has been revealed for us all.” 


Abu Dhar then continued his talk, advising Mu‘aawiyah and 
his followers to give up their landed estates, castles, money, and all 
their possessions, and to abstain from saving for themselves more 
than their daily need. 


Through the people's assemblies, congregations, and meetings, 
the news of the debate spread and reached everyone's ears. 


Louder and louder was Abu Dhar's anthem to be heard 
everywhere: "Announce to those who hoard up gold and silver the 
warning of branding irons." Mu*aawiyah felt the danger of the words 
of the great, honorable, and rebellious Companion who terrified him. 
Yet Mu‘aawiyah appreciated his value and did not harm him, but he 
immediately wrote to the Caliph “Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased 
with him), “Abu Dhar spoils the people in Syria." 


‘Uthmaan sent for Abu Dhar, asking him to come to Al - 
Madiinah. Abu Dhar set off from Syria with kindness, affection, 
and honor. His farewell day was celebrated in Syria in a manner 
Damascus had never witnessed the like of. 


* * * 


"[ don't need your world!" That is what Abu Dhar said to the 


57 


Caliph ‘Uthmaan after he reached Al-Madiinah and a prolonged 
conversation took place between them. 


After this conversation and after having heard the news coming 
from all different regions of the Muslim world, it was confirmed that 
Abu Dhar's opinions had actually agitated the multitudes, who began 
to crystallize around them. It was at that time that “Uthmaan began 
to truly realize the actual danger of Abu Dhar's opinion and its 
strength. He therefore decided to keep him beside him at Al- 
Madiinah. 


~Uthmaan presented to him his decision in a very kind and 
friendly way. He said to him, "Stay here beside me. You will be 
endowed with blessings day and night." Abu Dhar then answered, “I 
don't need your world." 


Indeed, he did not need people's world. He was one of those 
saints who searched for the enrichment of their soul, dedicating his 
life to giving, not to receiving! 


He asked the Caliph “Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased with 
him) to allow him to go out to Ar-Rabadhah, and he allowed him. 


Despite his fierce opposition, he stayed close to Allah and His 
Prophet (PBUH) in a very honest way, always keeping within his 
soul the Prophet's advice never to carry a sword. It was as if the 
Prophet had seen the whole of Abu Dhar's destiny and future, so he 
bestowed upon him this precious advice. 


Abu Dhar never hid his annoyance when seeing those who liked 
to ignite the flames of civil strife by using his words and opinions as a 
means to satisfy their passionate desire and cunning deceits. 


One day, while in Ar-Rabadhah, a delegation from Kufa came 
to ask him to raise the flag of revolution against the caliph. He drove 
them back with decisive words: "By Allah, if “Uthmaan was to 
crucify me on the longest board or on a mountain, I would patiently 
obey, for Allah's reward would be waiting for me, and I see it to be 


58 


the best for me. And if he was to force me to walk from one end of 
the horizon to the other, I would patiently obey, for Allah's reward 
would be waiting for me, and I see it to be the best for me. And if he 
was to force me back to my home I would patiently obey, for Allah's 
reward would be waiting for me, and I see it to be the best for me." 


He was aman who was not interested in any worldly gain; 
thus he was blessed with insight by Allah. He realized again the 
tremendous danger involved in armed civil strife; therefore, he 
abstained from it. But he also realized the tremendous danger 
involved in silence; therefore, he abstained from it. That is why he 
raised his voice, not his sword, and raised the word of truth and 
sincerity. 


He was not tempted by greedy desires nor hindered by worldly 
obstacles. 


Abu Dhar kept himself busy with and devoted himself to 
sincere, honest opposition. 


He spent his whole life focusing on the faults of power and the 
faults of money. Thus power and money possessed the temptation. 
Abu Dhar was afraid his brethren would fall into their traps — his 
same brethren who had carried the standard of Islam with the 
Prophet (PBUH) and whom he wanted to remain the carriers of the 
Prophet's message (PBUH). 


Power and money were, furthermore, the backbone of societies 
and communities. If misused, the destiny of people would encounter 
serious and imminent danger. 


Abu Dhar wished so much that the Prophet's Companions 
would not be appointed as governors and would not collect fortunes, 
but would rather stay as they always had been: as spiritual guides to 
the right path for Allah's worshipers. 


He knew well the voracity of life and the voracity of money, 
and he knew that the example of Abu Dhar and ‘Umar was never 


59 


going to be repeated! How often did he hear the Prophet (PBUH) 
asking his Companions to be aware of the temptation of authority 
saying, "It's a deposition in trust, and on the Day of Resurrection it 
will be a shame and regret except to the one who was endowed with 
it justly and accomplished his duty." 


Abu Dhar went so far that he avoided his brethren if he did not 
boycott them, for no other reason than that they had become rules 
and, of course, had become wealthier. 


Abu Muusaa Al-Ash*ariy once met him. He had hardly seen 
him when he stretched his arms with joy and delight shouting, 
"Welcome Abu Dhar! Welcome my brother!" But Abu Dhar held 
himself back saying, "I am not your brother; ] was so before you 
became an administrator and governor." 


In the same way, Abu Hurairah once met and embraced him in 
welcome, but Abu Dhar pushed him back and said, “Isn't it you who 
became goveror, then extended your buildings and possessed 
plantations and cattle?" Abu Hurairah defended himself, trying to 
prove his innocence and refute those rumors. 


It may seem that Abu Dhar had an exaggerated position 
towards power and wealth, but he had a logic which was shaped by 
his sincerity to himself and his faith. Thus, Abu Dhar stood with his 
dreams, deeds, behavior, and viewpoints according to the same 
standard the Prophet (PBUH) and his two Companions Abu Bakr 
and “Umar had left behind. 


If some people saw that standard to be an out-of-reach ideal, 
Abu Dhar saw it to be an example charting the path of life and toil 
especially for those who had actually experienced the Prophet 
(PBUH), prayed behind him, taken part in jihaad with him, and 
sworn the oath of allegiance to him. 


In addition to that — as mentioned before — his inspired 
intellect knew the decisive influence of power and property in 


60 


determining people's destiny. Therefore, any disturbance which might 
afflict the trustworthiness of power or the fairness of wealth 
represents an imminent danger which must be resisted and opposed. 


* * * 


As long as he lived, Abu Dhar upheld the standard of the 
Prophet (PBUH) and his two Companions’ good example. He was a 
great figure in the art of predominance over the temptation of power 
and wealth. The governorship of Iraq was once offered to him, but he 
said, "By Allah, you will never tempt me with your world." 


Once, one of his companions saw him wearing an old gown and 
asked him, "Don't you have another one? I saw you a couple of days 
ago with two other gowns in your hands." Abu Dhar replied, "O 
cousin! I gave them to someone who needed them more than I do." He 
said to him," By Allah, you need them!" Abu Dhar then answered, 
"May Allah forgive us. You glorify this life! Can't you see that I am 
wearing a gown? And I own another one for the congregational 
Friday prayer. Moreover, I own a goat which I milk and a donkey 
which I ride. Is there a better blessing?” 


* * * 


He once sat down talking to people and said, “My friend 

advised me to do seven things: 

* He asked me to love the poor and to get closer to them. 

* He asked me to look to those who are inferior and not to those 
who are superior. 

* He asked me never to ask anyone for anything (i.e. to abstain 
from begging). 

* He asked me to be kind to my relatives. 

* He asked me to say the truth, no matter how sour it may be. 

* He asked me never to be afraid of a critic's censure. 

* And he asked me to frequently say, ‘There is no power nor might 
except Allah's.’ ” 


61 


He lived according to this advice until he became a living 
conscience moving among his people. 


Imam “Aliy once said, "There is no one nowadays who is 
nonchalant about people's criticism — as far as Allah and His rules 
are concerned — except Abu Dhar." 


He lived opposing the abuse of power and the monopoly of 
property. He lived resisting all that was wrong and building all that 
was right. He lived devoted to the responsibility of good advice and 
warning. 


When he was hindered from spelling out his fatwaa (formal 
legal opinion in Islamic law), he raised his voice and said to those 
hindering him, "By the name of the One in Whose hands my soul is, if 
you put the sword to my neck and I still thought that I could carry 
out a word I've heard from the Prophet (PBUH) before you cut, | 
would carry it out." 


Had the Muslims listened on that day to his advice, a lot of 
civil strife and turmoil would have been prevented — turmoil that 
reached its peak and dangers that became grave, serious, and 
imminent. The state, society and Muslim nation had to face all that 
rebellion and aggrevated, alarming danger. 


But then Abu Dhar was suffering the agony of death in Ar- 
Rabadhah, the place he chose to stay in after his disagreement with 
“Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased with him). Let us go to him to give 
him farewell and let us see how the last scene of his admirable life is. 


This slim dark-skinned woman sitting crying] beside him is his 
wife. He is asking her, "Why do you cry and death is true?" She 
answers crying, "You are dying and I don't have a gown which 
suffices to be a winding sheet!!" He smiles like a passing evening glow 
and says to her "Calm down. Don't cry. I heard the Prophet (PBUH) 
once saying while I was sitting among a number of Companions, ‘One 
of you will die in a desert land, and a group of the faithful will 
witness him.’ All those who were sitting with me at that assembly 


62 


have died, whether in a village or among a congregation. No one is 
left except me, and now IJ am dying in a desert land. Watch out, a 
group of the faithful will soon show up. By Allah, I didn't lie in my 
life." He passed away. Blessed was he. 


There is a caravan which sets off on a journey across the desert. 
It consists of a group of the faithful with ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘uud, the 
Prophet's Companion, at their head. Ibn Mas‘uud visualized the 
scene before he reached it: a scene of an out-stretched body like that 
of a dead person and beside him a crying woman and boy. 


He redirects his camel's bridle and the whole caravan follows 
him towards the scene. He has hardly taken a look at the dead body, 
when he realizes that it is his companion and brother in Islam, Abu 
Dhar. 


His tears roll down abundantly while he stands in front of this 
virtuous body saying, "The Messenger of Allah was truthful. You will 
walk alone, die alone, and resurrect alone." 


* * * 


Ibn Mas*uud (May Allah be pleased with him) narrated the 
interpretation of the statement "You will walk alone, die alone,. and 
resurrect alone,” to his companions: 


* * * 


That was in the ninth year after Hijrah, during the Battle of 
Tabuuk, when the Prophet (PBUH) had ordered full preparation to 
meet the Romans, who had begun to carry out their conspiracies and 
cunning tricks against Islam. 


The days in which people were asked to go out for jihaad were 
very hot, distressful, and hard. The destination was far away and 
the enemy terrifying. 


63 


A group of Muslims refrained from going forth, justifying their 
position with different apologies. The Prophet (PBUH) and his 
Companions went forth. The farther they went, the more exhausted 
and tired they became. Whenever a man stayed behind people said, 
"O Prophet! So-and-so stayed behind." He then said, "Let him! If he's 
any good, he will reach you. If he's something else, then Allah will 
save you his trouble." 


One day the people turned around. They could not find Abu 
Dhar. They told the Prophet (PBUH) that Abu Dhar had stayed 
behind and his camel had slowed down. It is here that the Prophet 
(PBUH) repeated his first statement. Abu Dhar's camel became 
weaker under the severe pressure of hunger, thirst, and hot weather. 
It stumbled due to weakness and fatigue. Abu Dhar tried by all 
means to force it to move forward, but the burden of the camel's 
exhaustion was too heavy. 


Finally, Abu Dhar felt that he would be left behind, losing the 
caravan's traces. Therefore, he dismounted from his camel, took his 
belongings, carried them on his back, and continued his route on foot 
over the burning desert sand, hurrying in order to rejoin the Prophet 
(PBUH) and his Companions. 


In the early morning, while the Muslims were stopped for a 
while to rest, one of them saw a cloud of dust and sand behind 
which the shadow of a man could be seen. The one who saw that 
said to the Prophet (PBUH), "O Messenger of Allah, there is someone 
walking alone." The Prophet (PBUH) said, "It is Abu Dhar." 


The Muslims continued their talk until the man crossed the 
remaining distance between them. Only then were they able to know 
who he was. 


The respectful traveler approached little by little. Although he 
could only with great effort pull his feet out of the burning sand and 
with a lot of pain carry the heavy burden on his back, he was very 
delighted to have finally reached the blessed caravan without staying 
behind and abandoning the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions. 


64 


When he at last reached the caravan, someone shouted, "O Prophet, 
it's Abu Dhar." Abu Dhar headed towards the Prophet (PBUH). 
The Prophet (PBUH) had hardly seen him, when he tenderly, kindly, 
and sadly smiled and said, “Allah will have mercy upon Abu Dhar. 
He walks alone, dies alone, and resurrects alone." 


* * * 


Twenty years or more had passed since then. Abu Dhar died 
alone in the desert of Ar-Rabadhah, having walked ona path no one 
else had passed over so gloriously . 


He is also remembered alone by history for his brave resistance 
and his great asceticism. Allah will also resurrect him alone, because 
the multitude of his various merits will not enable anyone else to find 
a place near him. 


65 


(4) 
BILAAL IBN RABAAH 
Sneering at Horror! 


Whenever “Umar Ibn Al Khattaab mentioned Abu Bakr he 
would say, "Abu Bakr is our master and the emancipator of our 
master." That is to say, Bilaal. 


Indeed, the man to whom “Umar would give the agnomen "Our 
Master" must be a great and fortunate man. However, this man — 
who was very dark in complexion, slender, very tall, thick- haired 
and with a sparse beard, as described by the narrators --- would 
hardly hear words of praise and commendation directed at him and 
bestowed bountifully upon him without bending his head, lowering his 
eyelids and saying with tears flowing down his two cheeks, "Indeed, I 
am an Abyssinian. Yesterday, I was only a slave!” 


- So who is this Abyssinian who was yesterday only a slave? He 
is Bilaal Ibn Rabaah the announcer of the time of Muslim prayer and 
the troublemaker to the idols. He was one of the miracles of faith and 
truthfulness, one of Islam's great miracles. For out of every ten 
Muslims, from the beginning of Islam until today and until Allah wills, 
we will meet seven, at least, who know Bilaal. That is, there are 
hundreds of millions of people throughout the centuries and 
generations who know Bilaal, remember his name, and know his role 
just as they know the two greatest Caliphs in Islam, Abu Bakr and 
“Umar! 


Even if you ask a child who is still in his first years of primary 
school in Egypt, Pakistan, Malaysia, or China, in the two Americas, 
Europe, or Russia, in Iraq, Syria, Turkey, Iran, or Sudan, in Tunis, 
Algeria, or Morocco, in the depth of Africa and in the mountains of 
Asia, in every place on the earth where Muslims reside, you can ask 
any Muslim child, "Who is Bilaal, child?" He will answer you, "He 
was the muezzin of the Messenger (PBUH) and he was the slave 
whose master used to torture him with hot burning stones to make him 
apostatize. But instead he said, ‘One, One." " 


66 


Whenever you consider this enduring fame that Islam bestowed 
upon Bilaal, you should know that before Islam this Bilaal was no 
more than a slave who tended herds of camels for his master for a 
handful of dates. Had it not been for Islam, it would have been his 
fate to remain a slave, wandering among the crowd until death 
brought an end to his life and caused him to perish in the profoundest 
depths of forgetfulness. 


However, his faith proved to be true, and the magnificence of 
the religion which he believed in gave him, during his lifetime and in 
history, an elevated place among the great and holy men of Islam. 
Indeed, many human beings of distinction, prestige, or wealth have 
not obtained even one-tenth of the immortality which Bilaal the 
Abyssinian slave gained. Indeed, many historical figures were not 
conferred even a portion of the fame which has been bestowed upon 
Bilaal. 


Indeed, the black color of his complexion, his modest lineage, 
and his contemptible position among people as a slave did not 
deprive him, when he chose to embrace Islam, of occupying the high 
place which his truthfulness, certainty, purity, and self-sacrifice 
qualified him for. For him, all this would not have been on the scale of 
estimation and honor except as an astonishing occurrence when 
greatness is found where it could not possibly be. 


People thought that a slave like Bilaal — who descended from 
strange roots, who had neither kinfolk nor power, who did not 
possess any control over his life but was himself a possession of his 
master who had bought him with his money, who came and went 
amid the sheep, camels, and other livestock of his master — they 
thought that such a human creature would neither have power over 
anything, nor become anything. But he went beyond all expectations 
and possessed great faith that no one like him could possess! He was 
the first muezzin of the Messenger and of Islam, a position which was 
aspired to by all the masters and nobles of the Quraish who embraced 
Islam and followed the Messenger. Yes, Bilaal Ibn Rabaah. 


67 


Oh what valor and greatness are expressed by these three words 
— Bilaal Ibn Rabaah! 


He was an Abyssinian from the black race. His destiny made 
him a slave of some people of the tribe of Jumah in Makkah, where his 
mother was one of their slave girls. He led the life of a slave whose 
bleak days were alike and who had no right over his day and no hope 
for his tomorrow. 


The news of Muhammad's (PBUH) call began and reached his 
ears when people in Makkah began to talk about it and when he began 
listening to the discussions of his master and his guests, especially 
Umayah Ibn Khalaf, one of the elders of the Bani Jumah, of which 
Bilaal was one of the slaves. How often did he hear Umayah talking 
to his friends for some time and to some persons of his tribe. Many 
times they talked about the Messenger with words that were 
overflowing with anxiety, rage, and malice! 


Bilaal, on the other hand, was receiving between those words of 
insane fury and rage the attributes of this new religion. He began to 
feel that they were new qualities for the environment which he lived in. 
He was also able to receive during their threatening, thunderous talks 
their acknowledgement of Muhammad's nobility, truthfulness, and 
loyalty. Yes indeed, he heard them wondering and amazed at what 
Muhammad came with. They said to one another, "Muhammad was 
never a liar, magician, or mad, but we have to describe him this way 
until we turn away from him those who rush to his religion." 


He heard them talking about his honesty and loyalty, about his 
manliness and nobility, and about his purity and composure of his 
intelligence. He heard them whispering about the reasons which 
caused them to challenge and antagonize him: first, their allegiance to 
the religion of their fathers; second, their fear over the glory of the 
Quraish which was bestowed upon them because of their religious 
status as acenter of idol worship and resort in the whole of the 


68 


Arabian Peninsula; third, the envy of the tribe of Bani Haashim that 
anyone from them should claim to be a prophet or messenger. 


* % * 


One day Bilaal Ibn Rabaah recognized the light of Allah and 
heard His resonance in the depths of his good soul. So he went to the 
Messenger of Allah and converted to Islam. It did not take long before 
the news of his embracing Islam was spread. It was a shock to the 
chiefs of the Bani Jumah, who were very proud and conceited. The 
devils of the earth sat couched over the breast of Umayah Ibn Khalaf, 
who considered the acceptance of Islam by one of their slaves a blow 
that overwhelmed them with shame and disgrace. 


Their Abyssinian slave converted to Islam and followed 
Muhammad. Umayah said to himself, "It does not matter. Indeed the 
sun this day shall not set but with the Islam of this stray slave.” 
However, the sun never did set with the Islam of Bilaal, but it set 
one day with all the idols of the Quraish and the patrons of paganism 
among them. 


As for Bilaal, he adopted an attitude that would honor not only 
Islam, even though Islam was more worthy of it, but also all humanity. 
He resisted the harshest kind of torture like all pious great men. Allah 
made him an example of the fact that blackness of skin and bondage 
would not decry the greatness of the soul if it found its faith, adhered 
to its Creator, and clung to its right. 


Bilaal gave a profound lesson to those of his age and every age, 
for those of his religion and every religion, a lesson which embraced 
the idea that freedom and supremacy of conscience could not be 
bartered either for gold or punishment, even if it filled the earth. He 
was stripped naked and laid on hot coals to make him renounce his 
religion, but he refused. 


69 


The Messenger (PBUH) and Islam made this weak Abyssinian 
slave a teacher to all humanity in the art of respecting conscience and 
defending its freedom and supremacy. They used to take him out in 
the midday heat when the desert turned to a fatal hell. Then they 
would throw him naked on its scorching rocks and bring a burning hot 
rock, which took several men to lift from its place, and throw it onto 
his body and chest. This savage torture was repeated every day until 
the hearts of some of his executioners took pity on him. Finally, they 
agreed to set him free on condition that he would speak well of their 
gods, even with only one word that would allow them to keep their 
pride so that the Quraish would not say they had been defeated and 
humiliated by the resistence of their persevering slave. 


But even this one word, which he could eject from outside his 
heart and with it buy his life and soul without losing his faith or 
abandoning his conviction, Bilaal refused to say. Yes, he refused to 
say it and began to repeat his lasting chant instead: "One . . . One!" 


His torturers shouted at him, imploring him, " Mention the name 
of Al-Laat and Al--Uzzaa." But he answered, "One . . . One" They 
said to him, "Say as we say.” But he answered them with remarkable 
mockery and caustic irony, "Indeed my tongue is not good at that." 


So Bilaal remained in the melting heat and under the weight of 
the heavy rock, and by sunset they raised him up and put a rope 
around his neck. Then they ordered their boys to take him around the 
mountains and streets of Makkah. And Bilaal’s tongue did not 
mention anything other than his holy chant, "One... One." 


When the night overtook them, they began bargaining with him, 
“Tomorrow, speak well of our gods, say, ‘My lord is Al-Laat and Al- 
“Uzzaa,' and we'll leave you alone. We are tired of torturing you as if 
we are the tortured ones." But he shook his head and said, "One... 
One." So, Umayah Ibn Khalaf kicked him and exploded with 
exasperating fury, and shouted, "What bad luck has thrown you upon 
us, O slave of evil? By Al-Laat and Al--Uzzaa, I'll make you an 
example for slaves and masters." But Bilaal answered with the holy 
greatness and certainty of a believer, "One . . . One." 


70 


And he who was assigned to play the role of a sympathizer 
returned to talking and bargaining. He said, "Take it easy, Umayah. 
By Al-Laat, he will not be tortured again. Indeed Bilaal is one of us, 
his mother is our slave girl. He will not be pleased to talk about and 
ridicule us because of his Islam." But Bilaal gazed at their lying 
cunning faces, and his mouth slackened like the light of dawn. He 
said with calmness that shook them violently, "One ... One." 


It was the next day and midday approached. Bilaal was taken 
to the sun-baked ground. He was patient, brave, firm, and expecting 
the reward in the Hereafter. 


Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq went to them while they were torturing him 
and shouted at them, "Are you killing a man because he says, ‘Allah is 
my Lord?" Then he shouted at Umayah Ibn Khalaf, "Take more than 
his price and set him free." It was as if Umayah were drowning and 
had caught a lifeboat. It was to his liking and he was very much 
pleased when he heard Abu Bakr offering the price of his freedom, 
since they had despaired of subjugating Bilaal. And as they were 
merchants, they realized that selling him was more profitable to them 
than his death. 


They sold him to Abu-Bakr, and then he emancipated him 
immediately, and Bilaal took his place among free men. When As- 
Siddiiq put his arm round Bilaal, rushing with him to freedom, 
Umayah said to him, "Take him, for by Al-Laat and Al-Uzzaa if you 
had refused to buy him except for one ounce of gold, I would have 
sold him to you." Abu Bakr realized the bitterness of despair and 
disappointment hidden in these words. It was appropriate not to 
answer, but because they violated the dignity of this man who had 
become his brother and his equal, he answered Umayah saying, "By 
Allah, if you had refused to sell him except for a hundred ounces, I 
would have paid it." He departed with his companion to the 
Messenger of Allah, giving him news of his liberation, and there was a 
great celebration. 


71 


After the Hijrah of the Messenger (PBUH) and the Muslims to 
Al-Madiinah and their settling there, the Messenger instituted the 
Adhaan. So who would become the muezzin five times a day? Who 
would call across distant lands, "Allah is the Greatest" and "There is 


no god but Allah"? 


It was Bilaal, who had shouted thirteen years before while the 
torture was destroying him, "Allah is One . . . One." He was chosen 
by the Messenger that day to be the first muezzin in Islam. With his 
melodious soul-stirring voice, he filled the hearts with faith and the 
ears with awe when he called: 


Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest 

Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest 

I bear witness that there is no god but Allah 

I bear witness that there is no god but Allah 

I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of 
Allah 

I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of 
Allah 

Come to Prayer 

Come to Prayer 

Come to Success 

Come to Success 

Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest 

There is no god but Allah 


Fighting broke out between the Muslims and the army of the 
Quraish who came to invade Al-Madiinah. The war raged fiercely 
and terribly while Bilaal was there attacking and moving about in the 
first battle. Islam was plunged into the Battle of Badr, whose motto 
the Messenger (PBUH) ordered to be, "One... One." 


* * * 


In this battle, the Quraish sacrificed their youth and all their 
noblemen to their destruction. Umayah Ibn Khalaf, who had been 
Bilaal's master and who used to torture him with deadly brutality, 


72 


was about to retreat from fighting. But his friend ‘Uqbah Ibn Abu 
Mu‘iit went to him when he heard the news of his withdrawal, 
carrying a censer in his right hand. When he arrived he was sitting 
among his people. He threw the censer between his hands and said to 
him, "O Abu “Aliy, use this. You are one of the women." But Umayah 
shouted at him saying, "May Allah make you and what you came with 
ugly!" And he did not find a way out, so he went out to fight. 


What other secrets does destiny conceal and unfold? “Uqbah 
Ibn Abu Mu‘iit had been the greatest supporter of Umayah in the 
torture of Bilaal and other weak Muslims. And on that day, he himself 
was the one who urged him to go to the Battle of Badr where he would 
die, just as it would be the place where Uqbah would die! Umayah 
had been one of the shirkers from war. Had it not been for what 
Ugqbah did to him, he would not have gone out fighting. 


But Allah executes His command. So let Umayah go out, 
because there was an old account between him and one of the slaves 
of Allah. It was time to settle it. The Judge never dies. As you owe, 
you shall be owed to. 


Indeed destiny would be very much pleased to mock the tyrants. 
Ugbah, whose provocations Umayah used to listen to and follow his 
desire to torture the innocent believers, was the same person who 
would lead Umayah to his death. By the hand of whom? By the 
hand of Bilaal himself and Bilaal alone! The same hands that 
Umayah used to chain and whose owner he beat and tortured. Those 
very hands were on that day, in the Battle of Badr, on a rendezvous 
that destiny had set the best time for, with the torture of the Quraish 
who had humilidted the believers unjustly and aggressively. That is 
what really happened. 


When the fighting began between the two sides, and the side of 
the Muslims shouted the motto, "One... One," the heart of 
Umayah was startled, and a warning came to him. The word which 
his slave used to repeat yesterday under torture and horror became 
today the motto of a whole religion and of a whole new nation. 


73 


"One... One" Is it so? With this quickness? And with this 
rapid growth? 


The swords clashed in the battle and the fighting became severe. 
As the battle neared its end, Umayah Ibn Khalaf noticed “Abd Ar- 
Rahman Ibn ‘Awf, the Companion of the Messenger of Allah. He 
sought refuge with him and asked to be his captive, hoping to save his 
life. ‘Abd Ar-Rahman accepted his supplication and granted him 
refuge. Then he took him and walked with him amidst the battle to 
the place where captives were held. 


On the way Bilaal noticed him and shouted, "The head of kufr 
(disbelief), Umayah Ibn Khalaf! May I not be saved if he is saved!" 
He lifted up his sword to cut off the head which was all the time full 
of pride and arrogance. But “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn *Awf shouted at 
him, "O Bilaal, he is my captive!" A captive while the war was still 
raging? A captive while his sword was still dripping blood because of 
what he had been doing just moments before to the bodies of the 
Muslims? No! In Bilaal's opinion, this was an irony and abuse of the 
mind, and Umayah had scoffed and abused the mind enough. He 
scoffed until there was no irony remaining for such a day, such a 
dilemma, and such a fate! 


Bilaal realized that he would not be able alone to storm the 
sanctuary of his brother in faith, “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn “Awf. So he 
shouted at the top of his voice to the Muslims, "O helpers of Allah! 
The head of Kufr, Umayah Ibn Khalaf! May I not be saved if he is 
saved!" A band of Muslims approached with swords dripping 
blood. They surrounded Umayah and his son, who was fighting with 
the Quraish. ~Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ~Awf could not do anything. He 
could not even protect his armor which the crowd removed. Bilaal 
gazed long at the body of Umayah, who fell beneath the smashing 
swords. Then he hastened away from him shouting, "One... One." 


* * * 


74 


I do not think it is our right to examine the virtue of leniency in 
Bilaal on this occasion. If the meeting between Bilaal and Umayah 
had taken place in other circumstances, we would have been allowed 
to ask Bilaal for leniency, and a man like him in faith and piety would 
not have withheld it. But the meeting which took place between them 
was in a war, where each party came to destroy its enemy. 


The swords were blazing, the killed were falling. Then Bilaal saw 
Umayah, who had not left even a small place on his body free of the 
traces of his torture. Where and how did he see him? He saw him in 
the arena of battle and fighting, mowing down with his sword all of 
the heads of Muslims he could. If he had reached the head of Bilaal 
then, he would have cut it off. In such circumstances as the two men 
met, it is not fair to ask Bilaal: Why did you not forgive him gently? 


* * * 


The days went by and Makkah was conquered. The Messenger 
(PBUH) entered it, thankful and saying, “Allah is the Greatest,” at the 
head of 10,000 Muslims. He headed for the Ka*bah immediately, this 
holy place which the Quraish had crowded with idols amounting to 
the number of days of the year. "The truth has come and falsehood 
has vanished." 


Ever since that day, there has been no “Uzzaa, no Laat and no 
Hubal. Man will not bow to a rock or idol after today. People will 
worship no one with all his conscience but Allah, Who has no likeness, 
the One, Most Great, Most High. The Messenger entered the Ka‘bah 
accompanied by Bilaal. He had hardly entered it when he faced a 
carved idol representing Ibraahiim (Abraham) (PBUH) prophesying 
with sticks. 


The Messenger (PBUH) was angry and said, "May Allah kill 
them. Our ancestor never did prophesy with sticks. Ibraahiim was 
not a Jew or Christian, but he was a true Muslim and was never a 
polytheist." Then he ordered Bilaal to ascend to the top of the mosque 
and call to Prayer, and Bilaal called the Adhaan. How magnificent 
was the time, place, and occasion! 


75 


Life came to a standstill in Makkah, and thousands of Muslims 
stood like motionless air, repeating in submissiveness and whispering 
the words of the Adhaan after Bilaal while the polytheists were in 
their homes hardly believing what was happening. 


Is this Muhammad (PBUH) and his poor followers who were 
expelled yesterday from their homes ? Is this really he, with 10,000 of 
his believers? Is this really he whom we chased away, fought and 
killed his most beloved kin and relations? Is this really he who was 
speaking to us a few minutes ago while our necks were at his mercy, 
saying, "Go, you are free!"? 


But three nobles of the Quraish were sitting in the open space in 
front of the Ka‘bah, as if they were touched by the scene of Bilaal 
treading their idols with his feet and sending above its heaped 
wreckage his voice with the Adhaan, spreading to all the horizons of 
Makkah, like a passing spring. These three were Abu Sufyaan Ibn 
Harb, who had embraced Islam only hours ago, and “Attaab Ibn 
Usaid and Al-Haarith Ibn Hishaam, who had not yet embraced Islam. 


*Attaab, with his eyes on Bilaal crying out the Adhaan, said, 
“Allah has honored Usaid in that he did not hear this, or else he 
would have heard what would infuriate him." Al-Haarith said, "By 
Allah, if I were sure that Muhammad (PBUH) is telling the truth, I 
would follow him." Abu Sufyaan, the old fox, commented on their 
speech saying, "I am not saying a word, for if I do, these pebbles will 
inform about me." 


When the Prophet left the Ka*bah he saw them, read their faces 
instantly, and said with his eyes shining with the light of Allah and 
the joy of victory, "I know what you've said,” and he told them what 
they had said. 


Al-Haarith and‘ Attaab shouted, "We bear witness that you are 


the Messenger of Allah. By Allah, no one heard us, so we can't say 
somebody informed you!" 


76 


And they welcomed Bilaal with new hearts, which enclosed the 
echo of the words which they had heard in the Messenger's speech just 
after he entered Makkah. "O people of the Quraish, Allah has 
removed from you the arrogance of pre-Islamic paganism, and its 
boasting about forefathers. People are descended from Adam, and 
Adam was from dust." 


* * * 


Bilaal lived with the Messenger of Allah (PBUH), witnessing all 
the battles with him, calling to Prayer and observing the rites of this 
great religion that took him out of darkness to light and from servitude 
to freedom. The stature of Islam along with the stature of Muslims 
was elevated. Every day Bilaal was getting closer to the heart of the 
Messenger of Allah, who used to describe him as “one of the 
inhabitants of Paradise." 


But Bilaal remained just as he was, noble and humble, always 
considering himself "the Abyssinian who only yesterday was a slave.” 
One day he was proposing to two girls for himself and his brother, so 
he said to their father, " I am Bilaal and this is my brother, two slaves 
from Abyssinia. We were astray and Allah guided us. We were two 
slaves and Allah emancipated us. If you agree on us marrying your 
daughters, all praise is to Allah; if you refuse, then Allah is the 
Greatest." 


The Messenger passed away to Allah, well pleased and well 
pleasing, and Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq took the command of the Muslims 
after him. Bilaal went to the caliph (successor) of the Messenger of 
Allah and said to him, "O Caliph of the Messenger of Allah, I heard 
the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) say, ‘The best deed of a believer is 
jihaad in the cause of Allah." 


Abu Bakr said to him, "So what do you want, Bilaal?” He said,"I 
want to defend in the cause of Allah until I die." Abu Bakr said, "And 
who will call the Adhaan for us?" Bilaal said, with his eyes 


77 


overflowing with tears, "I will not call the Adhaan for anyone after 
the Messenger of Allah." Abu Bakr said, "Stay and call to Prayer for 
us, Bilaal." Bilaal said, "If you emancipated me to be for you, I will do 
what you want, but if you emancipated me for Allah, leave me to 
Whom I was emancipated for." Abu Bakr said, "I emancipated you 
for Allah , Bilaal." 


The narrators differ. Some of them believe that he traveled and 
remained fighting and defending. Some others narrate that he 
accepted Abu Bakr's request to stay with him in Madiinah. When 
Abu Bakr died and ‘Umar succeeded him, Bilaal asked his permission 
and went to Syria. 


Anyhow, Bilaal vowed the remaining part of his life to fight in 
the cause of Islam, determined to meet Allah and His Messenger 
having done the best deed they love. 


His melodious, welcoming, awe-inspiring voice did not call the 
Adhaan any more, because whenever he uttered in his Adhaan, "I bear 
witness that Muhammad (PBUH) is the Messenger of Allah," 
memories would stir him, and his voice would vanish under his 
sadness while the tears cried out the words. 


His last Adhaan was during the days ‘Umar, the Commander of 
the Faithful, when he visited Syria. The Muslims entreated him to 
persuade Bilaal to call one Adhaan for them. The Commander of the 
Faithful called Bilaal when it was time for Prayer and pleaded with 
him to make the Adhaan. Bilaal ascended and did so. The 
Companions of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) who were with the 
Commander of the Faithful while Bilaal was calling the Adhaan wept 
as they never did before, and “Umar the most strongly. 


* * * 


Bilaal died in Syria, fighting in the cause of Allah just as he had 
wanted. Beneath the dust of Damascus, today there lies the body of 
one of the greatest men of humankind in standing up for the creed of 
Islam with conviction. 


78 


(5) 
ABD ALLAH IBN “UMAR 
The Persistent and Repentant to Allah 


When he was at the peak of his long life he said, " I swore the 
oath of allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH). I never broke my oath, nor 
have I turned to something else to this day. I never swore allegiance to 
those in civil strife, nor did I awake a sleeping Muslim." 


These words are a summary of the life of that virtuous man 
who lived past the age of 80. His relationship with Islam and the 
Prophet began when he was only 13 years old, when he accompanied 
his father to the battle of Badr, hoping to have a place among the 
Mujaahiduun, but he was sent back by the Prophet due to his young 
age. Since that day — and even before that when he accompanied his 
father on his Hijrah to Al-Madiinah — that young boy who possessed 
premature manly merits began his relation with the Prophet of Islam 
(PBUH). 


From that day till the day he passed away at the age of 85, we 
will always find him persistent, repentant, never deviating from his 
path, not even by a hairbreadth, never breaking the oath of allegiance 
which he had sworn, nor breaking a pledge he had made. The merits 
of ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar, which dazzle people's vision, are abundant. 
Among these are his knowledge, modesty, the straightness of his 
conscience and path, his generosity, piety, persistence in worship, and 
his sincere adherence to the Prophet's model. By means of all these 
merits and qualities did Ibn ‘Umar shape his unique personality, his 
sincere and truthful life. 


He learned a lot of good manners from his father, “Umar Ibn Al- 
Khattaab, and together with him, they learned from the Prophet 
(PBUH) all the good manners and all that can be described as noble 
virtues. 


Like his father, his belief in Allah and His Prophet was perfect; 
therefore, the way he pursued the Prophet's steps was admirable. He 


79 


He was always looking at what the Prophet was doing in every matter 
and then humbly imitating his deeds to the finest detail. For example, 
wherever the Prophet prayed, there also would Ibn “Umar pray, and 
on the same spot. If the Prophet invoked Allah while standing, then 
Ibn*Umar would invoke Allah while standing. If the Prophet invoked 
Allah while sitting, so also would Ibn “Umar invoke Allah while 
sitting. On the same particular route where the Prophet once 
dismounted from his camel and prayed two rak*ahs, so would Ibn 
“Umar do the same while traveling to the same place. 


Moreover, he remembered that the Prophet's camel turned twice 
at a certain spot in Makkah before the Prophet dismounted and 
before his two rak‘ahs of prayer. The camel may have done that 
spontaneously to prepare itself a suitable halting place, but Ibn ‘Umar 
would reach that spot, turn his camel in a circle, then allow it to kneel 
down. After that he would pray two rak‘ahs in exactly the same 
manner he had seen the Prophet (PBUH) do. Such exaggerated 
imitation once provoked the Mother of the Believers ‘Aa'ishah (May 
Allah be pleased with her) to say, "No one followed the Prophet's 
steps in his coming and going as Ibn “Umar did." 


He spent his long, blessed life and his firm loyalty adhering to the 
Prophet's Sunnah to the extent that a time came when the virtuous 
Muslims were asking Allah, "O Allah, save Ibn “Umar as long as I live 
so that I can follow him. I don't know anyone still adhering to the 
early traditions except him." 


Similar to that strong and firm adherence to each of the 
Prophet's steps and practice (Sunnah) was Ibn ~“Umar's respect for 
the Prophetic traditions (Hadith). He never related a hadith unless 
he remembered it to the letter. His contemporaries said, "None of the 
Companions of the Prophet was more cautious not to add or 
subtract something from a hadith than “Abd Allah Ibn *Umar." 


In the same way he was very cautious when giving a fatwah 
(legal formal opinion in Islamic Law). One day somebody came to 
ask him a fatwah . When he put forward his question, Ibn ‘Umar 
answered, "I have no knowledge concerning what you are asking 


80 


about." The man went his way. He had hardly left the place when Ibn 
“Umar rubbed his hands happily saying to himself, “Ibn ‘Umar has 
been asked about what he doesn't know, so he said, ' I don't know!’ " 


He was very much afraid to perform ijtihaad (independent 
judgment in a legal question) in his fatwah, although he was living 
according to the instructions of a great religion, a religion which grants 
a reward to the one who makes a mistake and two rewards to the one 
who comes out with a correct righteous fatwah. However, Ibn ~Umar's 
piety deprived him of the courage to make any fatwahs. 


In the same way he refrained from the post of judge. The 
position of a judge was one of the highest positions of state and 
society, guaranteeing the one engaged in it wealth, prestige, and glory. 
But why should the pious Ibn “Umar need money, prestige, and glory? 
The Caliph ~“Uthmaan once sent for him and asked him to hold the 
postion of judge but he apologized. “Uthmaan asked him, "Do you 
disobey me?" Ibn “Umar answered, "No, but it came to my 
knowledge that judges are of three kinds : one who judges ignorantly: 
he is in hell; one who judges according to his desire: he is in hell; one 
who involves himself in making ijfthaad and is unerring in his 
judgment. That one will turn empty-handed, no sin committed and no 
reward to be granted. I ask you by Allah to exempt me.” “Uthmaan 
exempted him after he pledged him never to tell anyone about that, 
for ‘“Uthmaan knew Ibn “Umar's place in people's hearts and he was 
afraid that if the pious and virtuous knew his refraining from holding 
the position of judge, they would follow him and do the same, and 
then the Caliph would not find a pious person to be judge. 


It may seem as if Ibn “Umar's stance was a passive one. 
However, it was not so. Ibn ‘Umar did not abstain from accepting the 
post when there was no one more suitable to hold it than himself. In 
fact a lot of the Prophet's pious and virtuous Companions were 
actually occupied with fatwah and judgment. 


His restraint and abstention would not paralyze the function of 
jurisdiction, nor would it cause it to be held by unqualified ones, so 


81 


Ibn ‘Umar preferred to devote his time to purifying his soul with more 
worship and more obedience. Furthermore, in that stage of Islamic 
history, life became more comfortable and luxurious, money more 
abundant, positions and authoritative ranks more available. The 
temptation of money and authoritative ranks began to enter the hearts 
of the pious and faithful , which made some of the Prophet's 
Companions — Ibn “Umar among them — to lift the banner of 
resistance to that temptation by means of making themselves models 
and examples of worship, piety, and abstention, refraining from high 
ranks in order to defeat their temptation. 


* * * 


Ibn “Umar made himself a "friend of the night", praying at night, 
crying, and asking forgiveness during its latter hours before daybreak. 
He had once, during his youth, seen a dream. The Prophet interpreted 
it ina way which made the night prayer “Abd Allah's utmost hope 
and a means of his delight and joy. 


Let us listen to him, while he narrates the story of his dream: 
During the Prophetic era, I saw a dream in which I was riding a piece 
of brocade which let me fly to any place in Paradise I wished. Then I 
saw two approaching me, intending to take me to hell, but an angel 
met them saying, "Don't be afraid," so they left me. My sister Hafsah 
narrated the dream to the Prophet (PBUH), who said, “What an 
excellent man “Abd Allah is. If he is praying at night, then let him pray 
more.” 


From that day until he met with Allah, he never stopped 
performing his night prayer, neither while staying in one place nor 
while traveling. He was frequently praying, reciting the Qur'aan, and 
praising Allah. Like his father, his tears rolled down abundantly 
whenever he heard a warning verse in the Qur'aan. 


“Ubaid Ibn “Umar said: I was once reading to “Abd Allah Ibn 
“Umar this verse: <How will it be for them when We bring from 
every nation a witness, and bring you to witness over them all? On 
that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger will 


82 


wish the earth to be split open and swallow them, but they will never 
conceal from GOD any of their saying > (4:41-42) Ibn “Umar began 
to cry till his beard was wet from his tears. One day he was sitting 
among his brothers reading < Woe to those who give insufficient 
measure, who when others measure for them they make full measure, 
but when they measure out, or weigh out for others, they give less 
than due. Do such not think that they shall be raised up on a Mighty 
Day? The Day when all mankind shall stand before the Lord of the 
Worlds > (83:1-6). Then he repeated again and again < The Day 
when all mankind shall stand before the Lord of the Worlds > while 
his tears were rolling down like heavy rain falls from the sky until he 
fell down because of his tremendous sorrow and crying. 


His generosity, asceticism and piety all worked together in 
complete harmony to shape the most magnificent merits of that great 
man. He gave out abundantly because he was generous. He granted 
the fine halaal things because he was pious, never caring if his 
generosity left him poor because he was ascetic. 


Ibn “Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) was one of those 
who had high incomes. He was a successful, honest merchant for a 
greater part of his life, and his income from the treasury (Bait Al- 
Maal) was abundant. However, he never saved that money for 
himself, but always spent it copiously on the poor, the needy, and 
beggars. 


Ayub Ibn Waa'il Ar-Rassiby tells us about one of his generous 
acts: One day Ibn “Umar was granted 4,000 dirhams and a piece of 
velvet. The next day Ayub Ibn Waa'il saw him in the market buying 
his camel some fodder on credit. Ibn Waa’'il went to his house asking 
his close relatives, "Wasn't Abu “Abd Ar-Rahman (i.e. “Abd Allah Ibn 
‘Umar granted 4,000 dirhams and a piece of velvet yesterday?" They 
said, "Yes." He then told them that he had seen him in the market 
buying fodder for his camel and could not find money for it. They 
told him, "He didn't go to sleep before distributing all of it, then he 
carried the velvet on his back and went out. When he returned it 
wasn't with him. We asked him about it, and he said, 'I gave it toa 
poor person.’ " 


83 


Ibn Waa’il went out shaking his head until he entered the market. 
There he climbed to a higher ground and shouted to the people, "O 
merchants, what do you do with your life? Here is Ibn “Umar who's 
been granted 4,000 dirhams, so he distributes them, then the next 
morning he buys fodder for his camel on credit?!" 


The one to whom Muhammad (PBUH) was tutor and ~Umar his 
father must be a great man, deserving all that is great. 


Ibn ‘Umar's generosity, asceticism, and piety, these three 
qualities demonstrate how sincere his imitation of the Prophetic model 
was and how sincere his worship. 


He imitated the Prophet (PBUH) to the extent that he stood 
with his camel, where the Prophet had once stood saying, "A camel 
foot may stand over a camel foot." His respect, good behavior, and 
admiration towards his father’reached also to a far extent. ‘Umar's 
personality forced his foes, his relatives, and, above all, his sons to 
pay him respect. I say, the one who belongs to that Prophet and that 
kind of father should never be a slave of money. Large amounts of 
money came to him but soon passed, just crossing his house at that 
moment. 


His generosity was never a means of arrogance. He always 
dedicated himself to the poor and needy, rarely eating his meal alone: 
orphans and poor people were always present. He often blamed 
some of his sons when they invited the rich, and not the poor ones, to 
their banquets, thereupon saying, "You leave the hungry behind and 
invite the sated ones." The poor knew his tenderness, felt his kindness 
and sympathy, so they sat down across his path for him to take them 
to his house. When he saw them he was like a sweet scented flower 
surrounded by a drove of bees to suck its nectar. 


* * * 
Money in his hands was a slave, not a master, a means for 


necessities and not luxury. Money was not his alone. The poor had a 
right to it, a mutually corresponding right, with no privilege kept to 


84 


himself. His self-denial helped him to reach such great generosity that 
he never stored, endeavored, or had a vivid interest toward the 
worldly life. On the contrary, he never wished to possess more than a 
gown to cover his body and just enough food to keep him alive. 


Once a friend coming from Khurasan presented him with a fine, 
delicate ,;handsome, embellished and decorated gown, saying to him, 
“I've brought you this gown from Khurasan. I would be pleased to see 
you take off this rough gown and wear this nice one." Ibn ‘Umar said, 
"Show it to me then. " He touched it asking, "Is it silk?” His friend 
said, "No, it's cotton." “Abd Allah looked at it for a while then 
pushed it away with his right hand saying, "No, I'm afraid to tempt 
myself. I'm afraid it would turn me into an arrogant, proud man. 
Allah dislikes the arrogant, proud ones." 


On another day, a friend presented him with a container filled 
with something. Ibn “Umar asked him, "What's that?" He said, 
"Excellent medicine, which I brought you from Iraq!" Ibn “Umar said, 
"What does it cure?" He said, "It digests food." Ibn “Umar smiled 
and said to his friend, "Digests food? I haven't satisfied my appetite 
for 40 years." 


He who has not satisfied his appetite for 40 years has not 
curbed his appetite due to need or poverty, but rather due to self- 
denial and piety, and a trial to imitate the Prophet and his father. 


He was afraid to hear on the Day of Judgment:<You have 
wasted all your good deeds for the enjoyment in the life of this world 
> (46:20). He realized that he was in this life just as a visitor or a 
passer-by. He described himself saying, "I haven't put a stone upon 
another (i.e. 1 haven't built anything) nor planted a palm tree since the 
Prophet's death." 


Maimuun Ibn Muhraan once said, "I entered Ibn “Umar's house 
and tried to evaluate all that was inside such as the bed, the blanket, 
the mat and so on. Indeed, everything. I didn't find it worth even 100 
dirhams." 


85 


That was not due to selfishness; he was very generous. But it 
was due to his asceticism, his disdain of luxury, and his adherence 
to his attitude of sincerity and piety. 


Ibn ‘Umar lived long enough to witness the Umayyid period, 
when money became abundant, and land and estates spread, and a 
luxurious life was to be found in most dwellings, let alone most 
castles. 


Despite all that, he stayed like a firm-rooted mountain, 
persistent and great, not slipping away from his paths and not 
abandoning his piety and asceticism. If life with its pleasure and 
prosperity — which he always escaped from — was mentioned, he 
said, "I've agreed with my companions upon a matter. I'm afraid if I 
change my stance I won't meet them again.” Then he let the others 
know that he did not turn his back to the worldly life owing to 
inability, so he lifted his hands to the sky saying, "O Allah, You know 
that if it weren't for fear of You, we would have emulated our clan in 
the Quraish in this life." 


* * * 


Indeed, if it were not for his God-fearing self, he would have 
rivaled people in this life, and he would have been triumphant. He did 
not have to rival people. Life was striving towards him and chasing 
him with its tempting pleasure. 


Is there any position more tempting than the caliph's? It was 
offered to Ibn “Umar several times, but he refused. He was 
threatened with death if he refused, but he continued his refusal and 
his shunning. 


. Al Hassan (May Allah be pleased with him) reported: When 
“Uthmaan Ibn *Affaan was killed, it was said to ~Abd Allah Ibn 
‘Umar, "You are the people's master and the son of the people's 
master. Go out so that people swear to you the oath of allegiance." 
He said, "By Allah, if I could, I would never allow a drop of blood to 
be shed because of me." They said, You will either go out or 


86 


we will kill you in your bed." He repeated his first statement. They 
tried to tempt him by frightening him, but all in vain! 


After that, when time passed and civil strife became rampant, Ibn 
“Umar was always the hope of the people who urged him to accept 
the caliph's position. They were ready to swear to him the oath of 
allegiance, but he always and constantly refused. 


His refusal may be seen as a reprehensible act. However, he had 
his logic and argument. After the murder of “Uthmaan (May Allah be 
pleased with him) the situation got worse and aggravated in a 
dangerous and alarming way. 


Although he was very humble towards the position of the 
caliph, he was ready to accept its responsibilities and face its 
dangers, but only on the condition that he be voluntarily and willingly 
chosen by all Muslims. However, to force one single Muslim to swear 
the oath of allegiance by sword was what he opposed, and so he 
refused the post of caliph. 


At that time, however, this was impossible. Despite his merits 
and the public consensus of love and respect for him, the expansion 
into the different regions, the long distances between them, and the 
disputes which furiously set fire between the Muslims and divided 
them into sects fighting each other made it impossible to reach such a 
consensus set by Ibn “Umar as a condition for his acceptance of the 
caliphate. 


A man once met him and said, "No one is more evil in the whole 
Muslim community than you!" Ibn ‘Umar said, "Why? By Allah, I've 
never shed their blood, or divided their community, or sowed 
dissension." The man replied, "If you had wished it, every single one 
would have agreed upon you.” Ibn “Umar said, “I don't like to see it 
(the caliphate) being offered to me while one man says no and another 
one says yes.” 


The people still loved him even after events changed and the 
caliphate went to Mu'aawiyah, then to his son Yaziid, then to 


87 


Mu‘aawiyah II, son of Yaziid, who stepped down renouncing its 
pleasure after a couple of days in office. 


Even on that day, when Ibn ‘Umar was an old man, he was still 
the people's hope and the hope of the caliphate. Thus Marwaan went 
to him saying, "Give me your hand to swear to you the oath of 
allegiance. You're the master of the Arabs, and the son of their 
master." Ibn ‘Umar asked, "What are we going to do with the people 
of the east?" Marwaan said, "Beat them until they swear the oath." 
Ibn “Umar replied, "I don't like to be 70 years old and a man gets 
killed because of me." 


Marwawan went away singing: | can see civil strife boiling in its 
pots and the kingdom after Abi Laila (ie. Mu’aawiyah Ibn Yaziid) 
will end in the hands of the victorious. 


* * * 


This refusal to use force and the sword is what made Ibn “Umar 
hold a position of neutrality and isolation during the armed civil strife 
between the parties of ~Aliy and Mu'aawiyah, reciting these solemn 
words: 


To the one who says, "Come to prayer," | will respond. 

And to the one who says, “Come to success,” I will respond. 
But to the one who says, "Come to kill your Muslim brother 
to take his money,” I will say, "No." 


But while remaining neutral and isolated he never turned to 
hypocrisy. How often did he confront Mu'aawiyah — while the latter 
was at the summit of his authority — with challenges which confused 
and hurt him till he threatened to kill him, and he was the one who 
said, "If there is only a tiny hair between me and the people it won't 
be torn." 


One day Al-Hajaaj stood preaching and said, "Ibn Az-Zubair 
has distorted the Book of Allah!" Hereupon Ibn ‘Umar shouted in his 


88 


face, "You are lying! You are lying! You are lying!" Al-Hajaaj was at a 
loss, struck by surprise. 


Everything and everyone was terrified even by the mention of his 
name. He promised Ibn ‘Umar the worst punishment, but Ibn ‘Umar 
waved his hand in Al-Hajaaj's face and replied, while people were 
dazzled, "If you do what you just promised, there is no wonder about 
it, for you are a foolish imposed ruler." 


However, despite his strength and bravery, he remained 
cautious until his last days, never playing a role in the armed civil 
strife and refusing to lean towards either of the parties. 


Abu Al-Aaliyah Al Barraa’ related: I was once walking 
behind Ibn “Umar without his realizing it. I heard him saying to 
himself, "They are holding their swords, raising them high, killing each 
other, and saying, 'O Ibn ‘Umar, give us a hand!’?" 


He was filled with sorrow and pain seeing Muslims blood shed 
by their own hands. As mentioned at the very beginning, he never 
awoke a sleeping Muslim. If he could have stopped the fight and 
saved the blood he would have done that, but the events were too 
powerful; therefore he kept to his house. 


His heart was with ~Aliy (May Allah be pleased with him), and 
not only his heart but it seems his firm belief, based on a narration of 
what he said in his last days: "I never felt sorry about something that 
I missed except that I didn't fight on the side of “Aliy against the 
unjust party.” 


However, when he refused to fight with Imam “Aliy, on whose 
side truth was, it was not because he sought a safe position, but 
rather because he refused the whole matter of the dispute and civil 
strife and refrained from a fight not one in which Muslims fight 
disbelievers, but one between Muslims who cut each other into pieces. 


He clarified this when Naafi> asked him, "O Abu “Abd Rahman, 
you are the son of ‘Umar and the Companion of the Prophet (PBUH) 


89 


and you are who you are. What hinders you from that matter?" He 
meant fighting on “Aliy's side. He replied, "What hinders me is that 
Allah has forbidden us to shed the blood of a Muslim. Allah the 
Mighty and Powerful said: < and continue fighting them until there is 
no more persecutions and GOD's Religion prevails > (2:193) and we 
did that. We fought the disbelievers until Allah's religion prevailed, 
but now, what is it we are fighting for? I fought when the idols were 
all over the Sacred House, from the corner to the door, until Allah 
cleared the land of the Arabs from it (idolatry). Should I now fight 
those who say, There is no god but Allah?" That was his logic, 
argument, and conviction. 


Thus he did not refrain from fighting, nor abstain from taking 
part in battle to escape fighting, nor did he passively refuse to 
determine the outcome of the civil war within the Ummah of the 
faithful. Rather he refused to hold a sword in the face of a Muslim 
brother. 


‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar lived long and witnessed the days in 
which life "opened its gates to the Muslims." Money became more 
abundant, high positions more available, while ambition and desires 
spread. But his magnificent psychological capacities changed the 
rules of his time. He changed the era of ambition, money, and civil 
strife into an era of asceticism, humility, piety, and peace. He turned 
persistently to Allah and lived according to his worship, firm belief, 
and humbleness. Nothing whatsoever could affect his virtuous nature 
shaped and modeled by Islam during his early years. 


The nature of life changed within the beginning of the Umayyid 
period. This change was inevitable. It was a period of expansion in 
every aspect of life, in the ambition of the state as well as the 
ambitions of individuals. 


In the midst of the excitement of temptation and the agitation of 
an era lured by the idea of expansion with its pleasure and booty, 
stood Ibn “Umar with his merits, occupying himself with his excellent 
spiritual progress. 


90 


He gained from his great excellent life all that he desired, so that 
his contemporaries described him by saying, "Ibn ‘Umar died while 
being like ‘Umar in his merit." 


Moreover, dazzled by the glitter of his merits, his 
contemporaries liked to compare him with his father ‘Umar saying, 
“Umar lived in a time when similar ones could be found, and Ibn 
“Umar lived in a time when there was no one similar to him." 


It is an exaggeration which may be forgiveable because Ibn 
“Umar deserved it. But as for ‘Umar, no one can be compared to him. 
It is absolutely out of the question that a similar one is to be found in 
any period of time. 


In the year A.H. 73, the sun sank and the ship of eternity 
hoisted its sail towards the next life carrying the body of the last 
representative of the first days of the Revelation in Makkah and Al- 
Madiinah: “Abd Allah Ibn “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab.* 


* The last Companion to pass away was Anas Ibn Maalik (May Allah 
be pleased with him) who died in Al-Basra in the year A.H. 91 or 93. 


91 


(6) 
SA‘D IBN ABI WAQQAAS 
The Lion's Claws ! 


A continuous stream of incoming news worried the Commander 
of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab. This news was about the 
deceitful attacks launched by the Persian forces against the Muslims 
at the Battle of Al-Jisr which cost the Muslims 4,000 lives in a single 
day and, moreover, about the Iraqis’ renouncement of allegiance and 
their violation of agreed-upon convenants. Therefore, he decided to 
personally lead the Muslim troops in a decisive fight against Persia. 


In fact, he set out accompanied by some of his companions, 
leaving ~Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib (May Allah be pleased with him) behind 
to act as his deputy over Al-Madiinah. 


However, he had hardly left Al-Madiinah when some of his 
companions found it wiser to ask him to return and appoint someone 
else for this task. 


This view was adopted by “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ~Awf, who 
saw it unwise to risk the caliph’s life in such a way while Islam was 
going through its most decisive days. 


‘Umar ordered the Muslims to gather for public consultation. 
Congregational prayer was then announced and ~Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib 
was sent for. He went with some Madinites to where “Umar and his 
companions were waiting. At last, they accepted “Abd Ar-Rahman 
Ibn “Awf's opinion. The assembly decided that “Umar was to go 
back to Al-Madiinah and another Muslim leader be chosen to combat 
the Persians. 


~Umar agreed to their decision, then asked his companions, 
"Whom do you see fit to be sent to Iraq?” They thought silently for 
a while. Then ~Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ~Awf shouted, "I've found him!" 
‘Umar said, " Who is it?” *Abd Ar-Rahman said, "The Lion's Claws: 
Sa*d Ibn Maalik Az-Zuhariy." 


92 


The Muslims supported his choice. ‘Umar then sent for Sa‘d Ibn 
Maalik Az-Zuhariy, also known as Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqaas, and 
appointed him governor of Iraq and Commander of the Army. 


Who is that "Lion's Claws"? It is he who, whenever he turned 
to the Prophet while sitting among his Companions, was greeted 
cheerfully by the Prophet saying, "He's my maternal uncle." 


Can anyone tell me who his uncle was? He was Sa‘d Ibn Abi 
Waqqaas. His grandfather was Uhaib Ibn Manaaf, the paternal 
uncle of Aaminah, the mother of the Prophet (PBUH). He accepted 
Islam when he was 17 years old. He embraced Islam very early. 
When he talked about himself, he said, "I witnessed a day in which I 
was third in Islam," which means that he was the third to embrace 
Islam. 


When the Prophet (PBUH) spoke about the One God and about 
the new religion whose teachings he was to spread all around, and 
before using Daar Al-Arqam as a refuge for himself and the 
Companions in those early days, Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqaas had already 
sworn the oath of allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH). 


Historical and biographical sources inform us that the 
conversion of Abu Bakr was the reason for Sa‘d's embracing Islam. 
He may have been one of those who announced their belief in Islam 
after Abu Bakr convinced them. This group included *Uthmaan Ibn 
“Affaan, Az-Zubair Ibn Al--Awaam, Abd Ar- Rahman Ibn *Awf and 
Talhah Ibn “Ubaid Allah. However, that does not omit the 
possibility that his conversion had taken place secretly and he had 
believed even earlier. 


Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqaas had many noble qualities which he could 
be proud of. However, he never arrogantly mentioned any of these 
merits, except for two great privileges. First, he was the first to throw 
a spear in the cause of Allah and the first to be struck by one. 
Second, he was the only one for whom the Prophet (PBUH) hoped 
his parents might be his ransom. That happened when the Prophet 
(PBUH) said to him on the day of Uhud, "Throw, Sa‘d. May 


93 


my father and mother be your ransom." Yes, indeed, he always 
mentioned proudly these two noble blessings. Thanking Allah, he 
always said, "By Allah, I am the first Arab to throw a spear in the 
cause of Allah." 


Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib said, "I have never heard the Prophet 
(PBUH) hoping that his parents may be made someone's ranson 
except Sad. On the day of Uhud I heard the Prophet (PBUH) say, 
"Throw Sad. May my father and mother be your ransom." 


Sa*d was considered to be one of the most courageous Arab 
and Muslim horsemen. He possessed two weapons, his lance and his 
prayer. Whenever he pierced an enemy with his lance he hurt him; 
whenever he invoked Allah He answered. He and the Companions 
always saw that this was due to the Prophet's prayer in favor of 
him. One day, when the Prophet saw him doing something which 
made him glad and delighted, he made the following plea: "O Allah, 
make his spear hit unerringly and answer his prayer." 


It was in this way that he became famous among his 
companions for his prayer, which was like a sharp sword. He knew 
that about himself; therefore, he never cursed a person. Sa*d would 
just trust Allah to do with him as He liked. 


An example of that is what “Aamir Ibn Sa‘d once narrated: 
Sa‘d once sawa man insulting ‘Aliy, Talhah and Az-Zubair. He 
forbade him, but he didn't stop. Sa‘d then said, " Then I will 
invoke Allah against you.” The man said, "You're threatening me as 
if you were a Prophet." 


Sad went away, performed his ablution and prayed two 
rak‘ahs. Then he lifted his hands up and said, "O Allah, if You know 
that that man has insulted people who have already been granted by 
You that which is the best and his cursing of them has annoyed You, 
then make an example out of him." Only a short while had passed, 
when a stray camel went out of a house. Nothing could stay it till it 
entered acrowd as if searching for something. Then it attacked the 


94 


man, and he fell between its legs. It continued to kick the man down 
till he died. 


If this phenomenon was to prove something, then it proved 
primarily the purity of his soul, the honesty of his faith, and the 
depth of his sincerity. He always sought to support his piety by 
halaal food; with great insistence he always refused to take doubtful 
money. 


Sa‘d lived until he became one of the wealthiest Muslims. 
When he died, he left a great fortune behind. Although the 
abundance of money and its legitimacy are rarely to be found 
together, they certainly were combined in the hands of Sa*d. Thus 
Allah granted him a great amount of halaal money. 


He (May Allah be pleased with him) was a great figure in the 
act of charity, as much as he was a great figure in the act of 
righteously choosing the sources of his money. His ability to collect 
purely halaal money was equal to, if not second to, his ability to 
donate it in the cause of Allah. 


He became ill during the Farewell Pilgrimage, when he was 
accompanying the Prophet (PBUH), who visited him. Sa‘d asked 
him (PBUH), "O Messenger of Allah, own alot of money and 
there is nobody to inherit from me except one daughter. May | 
contribute two thirds of my money as alms?" The Prophet (PBUH) 
said, "No." Then he said, "Then half of it?" The Prophet (PBUH) 
said, " No." Then he said, "Then a third?" The Prophet (PBUH) said, 
" Yes, and the third is too much. To leave your heirs wealthy is better 
than to leave them having to be dependent on someone. If you spend 
any money in the cause of Allah you'll be rewarded for it, even the 
bite you put in your wife's mouth." 


Sa‘d did not remain the father of one daughter because he was 
later on blessed with other children. 


95 


Sad used to cry a lot out of piety. Whenever he listened to the 
Prophet (PBUH) preaching or advising, his tears rolled down 
abundantly, so that his tears nearly filled his lap. 


He was blessed with success and accomplishment. Once the 
Prophet (PBUH) was sitting with the Companions when his eyes 
gazed on the horizon while listening to what was being revealed 
secretly and whisperingly. Then he looked at his Companions’ faces 
and said, "A man who belongs to Paradise will soon appear." The 
Companions turned in all directions trying to learn, who this 
successful person may be. After a while, Sa‘d arrived. 


Later on, ~Abd Allah Ibn “Amr Ibn Al--Aas asked him 
persistently to tell him the worship or deed which made him eligible 
for such a reward. Sa‘d told him, "Nothing more than what we all do 
or worship, except that I don't carry any spite or hatred towards any 
Muslim." 


This is the "Lion's Claws" as “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ~“Awf had 
described him. This is the man whom “Umar chose for the great day 
of the Battle of Al- Qaadisiyah. 


The Commander of the Faithful had insight into all his glittering 


merits when he chose him for the most difficult task confronting 
Islam and the Muslims: 


- His prayers were heard and answered; if he asked Allah for 
victory, he would be granted it. 


- His food was pure, his tongue was pure, his conscience was 
pure. 


- He was aman who belonged to Paradise, as the Messenger 
(PBUH) prophesied. 


- He was the horseman on the Day of Badr, the horseman on the 
Day of Uhud and in every battle he experienced with the 
Prophet (PBUH). 


96 


And another thing, which ‘Umar would not forget nor 
underestimate the value and importance among the 

characteristics which should be present in anyone facing major 
tasks, was the strength and firmness of his faith. 


‘Umar did not forget what happened between Sa‘d and his 
mother when he converted to Islam and followed the Prophet 
(PBUH). At that time, all attempts to hinder and obstruct him from 
the cause of Allah had failed. His mother used a device which none 
doubted would conquer Sa‘d's soul and drive him back to his 
people's idols. She announced her abstention from food and drink 
until Sa‘d returned to his anscestors' and kin’s religion. She actually 
carried on her hunger strike with death defying determination and 
had almost approached death. 


Despite all that, Sa*d did not care. He would not sell his faith 
and religion for anything, even if it were his mother's life. Hoping that 
his heart would yield upon seeing her, some relatives took Sa‘d to his 
mother, who was almost dying. 


Sa‘d went to her. The scene was so impressive, even mountain 
rocks would yield and melt. However, his belief in Allah and His 
Messenger proved to be stronger than rocks and iron. He came with 
his face nearer and shouted so that she could hear him. "You know, 
by Allah, mother, if you had 100 souls coming out one after the other 
| wouldn't abandon my faith in return for anything. Then eat if you 
like or don't eat!" 


His mother changed her mind. A divine revelation greeted 
Sa‘d's position and supported it. < But if they (both) strive with you 
to make you join in worship with Me others that of which you have 
no knowledge, then obey them not... > (31 : 15). 


Is he not, indeed, the Lion in his claws? Therefore the 
Commander of the Faithful should hand him the standard of Al- 
Qaadisiyah and throw him against the Persians, who recruited more 
than 100,000 trained warriors equipped with the most dangerous 


97 


weapons the earth had ever witnessed, led on that day by the most 
intelligent and cunning warlords. 


Indeed, all those horrible legions, will Sa‘d meet with his mere 
30,000 warriors, equipped only with spears, nothing more. However, 
their hearts were filled with the will of the new faith with all it 
represents: belief, vigor, and a rare, dazzling, longing aspiration for 
death and martyrdom. 


The two armies met in combat. No, they did not meet yet. 


Sa‘d is still there waiting for the advice and instructions of the 
Commander of the Faithful. Finally “Umar's message arrives, 
ordering him to move towards Al-Qaadisiyah, the gate to Persia. 


“‘Umar's words represented light and guidance: O Sa‘d Ibn 
Wahiib, do not be deluded if itis said, You are the Prophet's 
uncle and his Companion. Know that there is no relationship 
between Allah and anyone except through obedience to Him. All 
people, the noble ones as well as the lowly, all are equal in front of 
Allah. Allah is their God and they are His servants. The relationship 
between them is one of rivalry for preference by means of their well- 
being, whereas they can only get what is in Allah's hands by means of 
obedience to Him. Remember the Prophet's (PBUH) positions which 
he stuck to from the time he was sent to us until he left our world. 
Hold to them; it is an order. 


Then he said to him, Send me information about all your 
circumstances. Where have you reached and how? What is your 
enemy's position in respect to yours? Let your messages make me as 
if lam actually seeing you. 


Sa‘d wrote to the Commander of the Faithful describing 
everything. He almost showed him each soldier's position and state. 
Sa’d reached Al-Qaadissiyah. The Persians gathered their army as 
they never had before and appointed as their leader one of the most 
famous and dangerous commanders, Rustum. 


98 


Sa*d writes to ‘Umar the Commander of the Faithful, who 
replies: Don't be upset by what you hear from them, nor what they 
show you. Seek Allah's help and put your trust in Him. Send them 
people of insight, good judgment, and patience to call him to follow 
Allah's path, and write me every day. 


Sa’d writes again to the Commander of the Faithful saying, 
Rustum camped with his troops at Saabaat. He has brought his 
horses and elephants and marched towards us. “Umar replies to calm 
him. 


Sa‘d is a smart, brave horseman, the Prophet's uncle, one of the 
first converts, and hero of different wars and raids. No sword or 
lance of his ever failed to reach its target. He stands at the head of 
his army in one of the greatest historical battles as if he were an 
ordinary soldier, not deluded by power nor acting arrogantly because 
of leadership. His self-esteem could tempt him to rely completely on 
his own capacities, but despite that he always turns to the 
Commander of the Faithful in Al-Madiinah. Although miles and 
miles separate them, he sends him a message each day, exchanging 
viewpoints, advice, and opinions while the great battle is still to 
come. 


That was because Sa*d knew that “Umar in Al-Madiinah never 
decided alone, but consulted the Muslims and the Prophet's 
Companions around him. Despite the war circumstances, Sa‘d did 
not want to deprive himself or his army of the blessings and benefits 
of public consultation, especially if ‘Umar, a man with great 
inspiration, was among the consultants. 


* * * 


Sa°d carried out ~Umar's will and sent Rustum, the Persian 
leader, a number of his companions to call him to follow Islam and 
Allah's path. 


The conversation between them and the Persian leader lasted 
long. Finally they ended their talk by telling him, "Allah has chosen 


99 


us to turn whom He chooses of His creatures from paganism to 
monotheism, from the narrowness of life to its freedom, from ruler's 
injustice to Islam's fairness. Whoever accepts our offer, we will leave 
him alone and will refrain from hurting him. Whoever fights us, we 
will fight him until we fulfil Allah's promise." 


Then Rustum asked, " What is Allah's promise which He made 
to you?" 


The Companion answered, "Paradise for our martyrs and 
victory for the living ones." 


The delegation returned to Sa‘d, leader of the Muslims, to tell 
him that it was war. Sa‘d's eyes were hereby filled with tears. He 
had wished so much that the war would be delayed for some time. 
On that day his illness became more severe, and he had to suffer its 
heavy burden. The abscesses spread all over his body, to the extent 
that he could not sit, let alone ride his horse to take part in an 
extremely fierce and violent battle. 


If the war had just been waged before his illness or had it been 
delayed till he was cured and healthy again, then he would have 
proved himself brave. But now. . . No, the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH) had taught them never to say "If" because "If" means 
weakness. A strong believer is neither helpless nor weak. Thereupon 
The Lion's Claws stood up to preach to his soldiers. He began his 
speech citing the following glorious verse: < And We have written in 
the Zaboor (given to David) after the Torahe (given to Moses): 
“My righteous servants shall inherit the earth”> (21 : 105). 


Having finished his speech Sa‘d led his troops in the Dhuhr 
Prayer, then turned towards his soldiers and proclaimed four times, 
" Allahu akbar (Allah is the Greatest)! Allahu akbar! Allahu akbar! 
Allahu akbar!" 


The echo was to be heard all over the universe. Then he 
stretched out his arm like an unerring arrow pointing to the enemy 


100 


and shouted to his soldiers, “Let's start this battle accompanied by 
Allah's blessings.” 


With pains hard to bear, he ascended to the balcony of his 
residence, which he used as a dwelling and a headquarters. 


On the balcony he sat on a pillow and leaned upon his chest. 
His door was left open, which meant that by the least Persian attack 
against his residence he would be captured, alive or dead, but he was 
far from being afraid or terrified. 


His abscesses were bleeding and hurting him severely, but he 
had something else to think about. Sitting on his balcony, he was 
shouting, calling, and commanding. First to those in one flank to step 
forward towards the right, and then to those in another flank to fill 
out the empty spot on the left... Mughiirah, look forward! Jurair 
follow them! Nu*maan, hit! Ash*ath attack and you also, Qa*qaa’. 
Forward, forward, Prophet's Companions! 


His determined and hopeful sound turned each individual 
soldier into an army of its own. The Persian soldiers fell like flies and 
with them fell the worship of fire and paganism. After seeing the 
death of their commander and their best soldiers, the defeated, 
scattered remnants rapidly escaped. 


The Muslim army pursued them until they reached Nahawind 
then Al-Madaa’'in. There they fought to carry with them at the end 
the emperor's throne and crown as war booty. 


* * * 


At the Battle of Al-Madaa'in, Sa‘d could stand the test and 
prove himself brave. The Battle of Al-Madaa'in took place two years 
after ater the Battle of Al-Qaadissiyah, a period during which a lot 
of continuous armed clashes took place between the Muslims and the 
Persians. Finally, the scattered remnants of the Persian army 
gathered at Al-Madaa’'in itself, ready for a decisive and final scene. 


101 


Sa‘d realized that time was on his enemy's side; therefore, he 
decided to deprive them of this advantage, but how could he do 
that? The Tigris River in its flood season stood in the middle 
between him and Al-Madaa’in. 


Thereby, an event took place by which Sa‘d succeeded to 
prove that he indeed deserved ~Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn *‘Awf's 
description of him as the Lion's Claws. Sa‘d's faith and 
determination stood glittering in the face of danger, mocking and 
making fun of the impossible with admirable bravery. 


Sa‘d ordered his army to cross the Tigris River. He ordered 
them to search for a safe, secure ford in the river which would enable 
their crossing. Finally they found a place, but the fording was not 
free of extreme risks. 


Before the army started to cross, the leader Sa‘d wisely 
realized the necessity to safeguard their arrival spot on the opposite 
bank, where the enemy was camping. Therefore he prepared two 
detachments, the first of which was called The Detachment of Terror. 
Its leader was “Aasim Ibn “Amr. The second was called The 
Detachment of the Dumb, led by Al Qa’qaa™ Ibn ~Amr. 


The soldiers of these two detachments had to encounter many 
horrible situations to clear a safe place on the opposite bank for the 
army which would subsequently cross. They fulfilled their task with 
amazing skill. Sa‘d's success on that day will always be a cause for 
the perplexity of historians. 


Sa‘d himself was amazed by his own success. It also amazed 
his companion and escort Salmaan Al-Faarisiy, who shook his head 
in astonishment and said, “ Islam is indeed new. By Allah, seas have 
been subdued by them and the land has been subdued by them. In 
the name of the One in Whose hands Salmaan's soul lies, they will 
leave it ina group, as they entered it ina group." 


Indeed, that is exactly what happened. As they penetrated the 


102 


Tigris River in a group, so they left it in a group without losing one 
single soldier, nor annoying a single horse. 


It happened that a wooden cup fell from one of the warriors, 
who felt sorry to be the only one to lose something. He called his 
companions to help to get it out and a high wave pushed it to where 
someone could pick it up! 


Some historical sources described the magnificence of such a 
scene as the fording of the river: Sa‘d ordered the Muslims to say, 
"Allah is enough for us and He is the best to trust in." Then he 
penetrated the Tigris with his horse, and the people penetrated 
behind him. No one stayed behind. They walked as if they were 
walking on a land surface until they filled the whole area between the 
two banks. The water surface could not seen due to the numerous 
troops of cavalry and infantry. People went on talking while 
walking in the water as if they were on land, as a result of their 
feeling of security and tranquility, their trust in Allah's judgment and 
His victory, His promise and His support. 


When *Umar appointed him to be Iraq's governor, he set out to 
build Kufa and established the foundations of Islam in wide broad 
lands. 


One day the inhabitents of Kufa complained to the Commander 
of the Faithful about Sa*d. They lost contol over their flimsy, restless 
temper and made a funny claim saying, " Sa‘d can't pray well." Sa‘d 
laughed loudly and said, "By Allah, I prayed with them exactly as the 
Prophet's prayer was. I prolonged the first two rak*‘ahs and 
shortened the last two." 


When “Umar ordered him back to Al-Madiinah, he did not get 
annoyed. On the contrary, he responded to ‘Umar's call 
immediately. After some time, ‘Umar determined to return him to 
Kufa, but Sad responded laughing, "Do you order me to return to 
people who claim that I don't perform my prayers well?" He 
preferred to stay in Al-Madiinah. 


When the Commander of the Faithful “Umar (May Allah be 
pleased with him) was attacked, he chose six of the Prophet's 
Companions to be responsible for choosing the next caliph. ‘Umar 
said that he chose six of those with whom the Prophet was pleased 
before he died. Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqaas was one of them. 


But it seems from ~Umar's last words that if he would have 
chosen one of the Companions for the caliphate, it would have been 
Sa‘d. He said to his companions, advising and commending, " If 
Sa‘d is to become caliph, that's good; but if someone else is to be 
caliph, then he has to seek Sa*d's help." 


* * * 


Sa‘d lived long. He secluded himself during the period of civil 
strife following the death of the third Caliph, ‘Uthmaan. Furthermore, 
he ordered his whole family and children not to tell him any news 
about what was happening. 


Once, everyone was anxious to know his position, when his 
nephew Haashim Ibn *Utbah Ibn Abi Waqqaas, said to him, "O uncle, 
here are 100,000 swords which consider you the more entitled to that 
matter (i.e. the caliphate).". Sa‘d responded, "I want out of the 
100,000 swords, just one sword that if it hits a believer it won't do 
anything, but if it hits a disbeliever it cuts through." 


His nephew realized «hat he meant and left him in his isolation 
and security. 


When the dispute ended in favor of Mu‘aawiyah, who took 
over the reins of government, he asked Sa‘d, "Why didn't you fight 
with us?" He answered, "A dark cloud passed over me. I told it, 
Shoo! Shoo! I stopped my riding camel until it passed away.” 


Mu‘ aawiyah said, "Shoo! Shoo can not be found in the glorious 
Book of Allah, but Allah said < And if two parties or groups among 
the believers fall into fighting, then make peace between them both, 
but if one of them rebels against the other, then fight you (all) 


104 


against the one that which rebels till it complies with the Command 
of Allah > (49 :9). And you did not take anyone's side. You weren't 
with the unjust against the just, nor were you with the just against the 
unjust." Hereupon Sa‘d responded, "I wouldn't have fought a man 
(he meant “Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib) to whom the Prophet (PBUH) said, 
"You have towards me the same position Haaruun (Aaron) had 
towards Muusaa (Moses), except that there isn't any Prophet coming 
after me.'” 


One day in A.H. 54, having exceeded the age of 80, he was at 
his house in Al--Aqiiq preparing to meet Allah. 


His son spoke of his final moments: His head was upon my 
lap, he was passing away. I cried, but he said, "What makes you cry, 
my son? Allah will never torture me. I belong to Paradise!" 


The firmness of his faith could not be weakened even by the 
quaking fear of death. The Prophet (PBUH) had passed him the 
good news and he believed firmly in the Prophet's honesty; therefore 
what was there to be afraid of ? "Allah will never torture me. I belong 
to Paradise!" 


However, he wanted to meet Allah carrying the most 
magnificent and most wonderful memory, a memory which joined 
him with his religion and his Prophet (PBUH). Therefore, he pointed 
to his coffer. They opened it and got out an old, torn, threadbare 
gown. He ordefed his kin to shroud him in that gown saying, "I met 
the disbelievers at the Battle of Badr wearing it. I've saved it for this 
day." 


Indeed, this threadbare gown was not just a gown. It was the 
banner waving over a long great life. Our hero lived it honestly, 
bravely, and faithfully. 


The body of the last Muhaajiruun was buried in Al- Madiinah, 
safely laid beside a group of great Companions who preceded him to 


105 


Allah. Their exhausted bodies had finally found a secure shelter in 
the ground of Al-Baqii*. 


* * * 
Farewell, Sa‘d. Farewell Sa‘d, the hero of Al-Qaadissiyah, 


conquerer of Al-Madaa'in, extinguisher forever of the worshipped fire 
of Persia ! 


(7) 
SUHAIB IBN SINAAN 
O Abu Yahia! A Successful Purchase ! 


He was born surrounded by comfort and luxury. His father 
was the governor of Al Uballah and its ruler on behalf of the 
Persian king, and was one of the Arabs who emigrated to Iraq long 
before Islam. In his palace on the bank of Euphrates, next to 
Mosul, the child lived happily and comfortably. 


One day the country was attacked by the Romans (Byzantines) 
who captured a large number and enslaved the boy Suhaib Ibn 
Sinaan. 


He was taken by slave traders until finally his long journey 
ended in Makkah. There he was sold to “Abd Allah Ibn Jud*aan, 
after having spent his childhood and most of his youth in Roman 
lands, where he adopted their language and dialect. 


His master was:so amazed by his intelligence, energy, and 
sincerity that he emancipated him and set him free, giving him the 
privilege to trade with him. 


One day ... let his friend ~*Ammaar Ibn Yaasir tell us what 
happened on that day : I met Suhaib Ibn Sinaan in front of the door 
of Daar Al-Argam when the Prophet (PBUH) was there. I asked, 
"What do you want?" He answered, "And what do you want?" I 
said, "I want to meet Muhammad (PBUH) to hear what he is saying." 
He said, "I want the same." We both entered and met the Prophet 
(PBUH), who invited us to embrace Islam, and we converted. We 
stayed as we were till evening. Secretly he went out. 


Thereupon, Suhaib got to know his path to Daar Al- Arqam. 
He got to know his path to guidance and light, but also to difficult 
sacrifice and great redemption. Entering through that wooden door, 
which separated Daar Al-Arqam and what was inside from the outer 


107 


world, was not just crossing a threshold, but crossing of a whole 
world of limitations. An old world, with all that represented it — 
religion, manners, customs and life — crossing it towards a new world 
with all that represented it — religion, manners, customs, and life. 


Crossing the threshold of Daar Al-Arqam, a threshold not 
wider than one foot, meant, in reality, to cross an ocean of terror, 
wide and expanding. Stepping over such an obstacle, such a 
threshold, meant the beginning of an era full of great responsibilities. 


As for the poor, the stranger, the enslaved, stepping over Daar 
Al-Argam's threshold meant exceptional, extraordinary sacrifices. 


Suhaib, our hero, was a stranger; “Ammar Ibn Yaasir, his friend 
whom he met in front of the door, was a poor man. Why did they go 
voluntarily to face terror and, moreover, do their best when they 
met with it in combat? 


It was the call of faith, which could not be resisted. It was the 
good character of Muhammad (PBUH), the scent of which filled the 
hearts of the reverent with love and guidance. It was his new, shining 
magnificence. Dazzling minds were fed up with the old, its 
misguidance and bankruptcy. Above all, it was Allah's mercy, 
bestowed upon whomever He wishes, His guidance and protection 
bestowed on whomever turns to Him. 


* * * 


Suhaib holds a position in the ranks of the faithful. He held a 
great and high position among the persecuted and tortured. He held 
a high position among the generous and self-sacrificing. 


He frankly described his great loyalty to his responsibilities as 
a Muslim who had pledged allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH) and 
walked under Islam's standard: I was present in every situation 
witnessed by the Prophet (PBUH). I was present at every pledge 
called by him. I was present in every detachment organized by him. 
The Prophet (PBUH) never took part in a raid, at the beginning of the 


108 


period or the end, without my being on his right or left. Whenever 
the Muslims feared a danger facing them, I was there in the front, and 
whenever they feared it in the rear, I was there at the back. I never let 
the Prophet (PBUH) stay in a position between me and the foe until 
he (PBUH) met Allah. 


It was a dazzling image of extraordinary faith and great 
loyalty. Ever since the first day he received Allah's light and put 
his hand into the Prophet's, Suhaib (May Allah be pleased with him 
and with all his Companions) was imbued with such outstanding 
faith. 


From that day, his relationship towards people and the world, 
let alone himself, acquired a new dimension. 


From that day, his character turned into a firm, humble and 
devoted one, subduing events and braving various types of horror. 


He went on — as already mentioned — bravely and 
courageously shouldering all his responsibilities, never lagging behind, 
whenever there was danger or a situation to be encountered. His 
passionate love and ardent desire were not directed towards gains 
and spoils but rather towards sacrifice and ransom; not towards the 
greed of life but rather towards the passion of danger and self- 
sacrifice. 


He began the days of his noble redemption and great loyalty 
with the day of his Hijrah. On that day he abandoned all his wealth, 
all his gold which he had gained by successful trade during the long 
years he lived in Makkah. He abandoned all his fortune, all that he 
owned in a split second, the glory of which was never stained by 
doubt or retreat. 


When the Prophet (PBUH) intended to emigrate, Suhaib knew 
that and he was supposed to be the third one of the three : the 
Prophet, Abu Bakr, and Suhaib. 


However, the Quraish decided to prevent the Prophet's 
emigration. Suhaib fell into one of their traps and was thereby 
hindered for some time from emigrating, while the Prophet (PBUH) 
and his companion set out accompanied by Allah's blessing. 


Suhaib disputed, talked, and argued until he got rid of his 
persecutors. He mounted his camel and sped across the desert. 
However, the Quraish sent its hunters to follow him. When they 
reached him, Suhaib had hardly seen them before facing them and 
shouting from a near distance, "O people of Quraish, you know that 
I am the best marksman. By Allah, you cannot reach me before I 
shoot each of my arrows with my bow, then I will strike you with 
my sword until it falls down. Come on, if you like to try. Or if you 
like, I will tell you where my money is, and so leave me alone." 


They agreed to take his money saying, "You came to us as a 
poor wretch. Your money increased in our land and among us you 
claimed high rank and now you want to excape together with your 
money?" 


He guided them to the place where he had hidden his fortune, 
then they left him alone and returned to Makkah. 


Strangely enough, they believed his words without doubt, 
without precaution. They did not ask him to prove his honesty, nor 
did they ask him to swear. This situation granted him a great honor, 
which he deserves as an honest and truthful man. 


Alone but happy, Suhaib continued his journey until he reached 
the Prophet (PBUH) at Qubaa’. 


When Suhaib came into view, the Prophet (PBUH) was sitting 
surrounded by his Companions. As soon as the Prophet (PBUH) 
saw him, he called to him cheerfully, "O Abu Yahia! A profitable 
sale! A profitable sale!" 


Hereupon, the glorious verse was revealed : < And of 
mankind is he who would sell himself, seeking the pleasure of Allah. 
And Allah is Full of kindness to (His) slaves > (2:201). 


Indeed, Suhaib had paid all his fortune — the fortune he spent 
all his youth to gather — in return for his faithful soul. He never felt 
it was an unjust bargain. Money, gold, the whole world, nothing of 
that sort was worthwhile as long as he kept his faith, the sovereignty 
of his conscience, and the determination of his fate. 


The Prophet loved him very much. Besides being pious and 
God-fearing, he was a cheerful and jovial person. The Prophet 
(PBUH) saw him once eating dates when there was an inflammation 
in one of his eyes. The Prophet (PBUH) asked him cheerfully, "Do 
you eat dates when there is inflammation in one of your eyes?” He 
answered, "What's wrong with that? | eat them with the other eye!" 


He was a generous donor, spending all his stipend from the 
treasury (Bait Al-Maal) in the cause of Allah, helping the needy, 
aiding the sorrowful, feeding the needy, the orphans, and the 
captives with the best food. 


His extreme generosity attracted the attention of ‘Umar, who 
said to him, "I can see you feeding people too much, to the extent that 
you are spending lavishly." Suhaib answered him, "I've heard the 
Prophet (PBUH)say, 'The best of you is the one who feeds (others). " 


* * * 


The life of Suhaib was filled with an abandance of merits and 
great situations. To be chosen by “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab to lead the 
prayer was another merit to be added. 


When the Commander of the Faithtul was attacked while 
leading the Muslims in Fajr Prayer and felt his end was coming 
nearer and nearer, he began to advise his companions. His last 
words were, "Let Suhaib lead people in prayer.” 


On that day “Umar chose six of the Companions and entrusted 
them with the choice of the new caliph. The Caliph of the Muslims 
was the one who led the prayers. In those days following the death of 
the Commander of the Faithful until the new caliph was chosen, who 
was to lead the Muslims in prayer? 


‘Umar would slow down a thousand times before choosing 
someone especially in these moments, while his pure soul was passing 
away to meet Allah. If he chose, then there was no one more eligible 
than the chosen. He chose Suhaib. 


He chose him to lead the Muslims in prayer until the next caliph 
came to carry out his duties. 


He chose him, despite the Roman accent obvious in his 
language. This choice was a divine blessing upon the pious 
worshipper Suhaib Ibn Sinaan. 


112 


(8) 
MU-AADH IBN JABAL 
The Most Learned of Halaal and Haraam 


Among the seventy-man delegation of the Ansaar who took the 
oath of allegiance to the Prophet in the Second Allegiance of ~Aqabah 
sat a young man with a bright face, graceful eyes, and a radiant 
smile. When he was silent, he attracted attention with his profound 
peacefulnes and devoutness. On the other hand, when he talked, he 
held his people spell-bound. This young man was Mu’aadh Ibn Jabal 
(May Allah be pleased with him). He belonged to the Angaar, and he 
was among the foremost believers who gave the second oath of 
allegiance to the Prophet. Naturally, a man of such precedence, faith, 
and certainty would not miss for the world a battle or an expedition. 
His uppermost quality was his knowledge of fiqh (jurisprudence)— 
the practical aspect of Muhammad's message. He reached the apex 
in knowledge and figh, to the extent that made the Prophet (PBUH) 
say, "The most learned man of my nation in halaal and haraam is 
Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal." 


He resembled “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab in his enlightenment, 
courage, and intelligence. When the Prophet sent him to Yemen, he 
asked him, "How will you give a judgment or settle a dispute?" 
Mu’aadh answered; "I will refer to the Qur'aan." The Prophet then 
asked, "What will you do if you do not find the decree you are 
looking for in the Qur'aan ?". Mu*aadh answered, "I will refer to the 
Prophet's Sunnah." The Prophet asked, "But what will you do if you 
do not find a decree even in the Sunnah?" Mu‘aadh readily 
answered, "I will be judge between mankind by resorting to juristic 
reasoning (ijtihaad) to the best of my power." Now, Mu‘aadh's 
staunch committment to Allah's Book and the Prophet's Sunnah does 
not mean that he closed his mind to the countless and endless hidden 
or equivocal facts that await someone to unravel and adjudicate. 


Perhaps both Mu*aadh’'s ability in juristic reasoning and the 
courageous usage of his intelligence enabled him to master the figh, 


excelling all other scholars. The Prophet justifiably described 
Mu‘aadh as "the most learned man of my nation in haaal and 
haraam." 


History portrays him as a man of remarkably enlightened, 
resolute, and decisive mind. For instance, ~Aaez Allah Ibn ~Abd 
Allah narrated that one day he entered the mosque with the 
Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) at the dawn of ‘Umar's 
caliphate. Then he sat among more than thirty men. Let us hear him 
narrate the story: "I sat with a group of more than thirty men. They 
were recalling a hadith of the Prophet (PBUH). In this ring sat a 
dark, swarthy young man who had a sweet voice and a radiant 
face. Whenever they disputed about a hidden or ambiguous meaning 
in the hadith, they at once sought his legal instruction or judgment. 
He seldom, if ever, spoke unless he was asked. When their meeting 
was over, I approached him and asked him, "Who are you, O Allah's 
Slave?" He answered, "I am Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal.” So I instantly felt 
close to him. 


Also, Shahr Ibn Hawshab said, "Whenever Mu*aadh Ibn Jabal 
was present when the Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) were 
holding a meeting, they looked at him with reverence." 


‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, the Commander of the Faithful, often 
consulted him. It seemed that Mu‘aadh had a highly disciplined 
mind and a captivating and convincing logic that moved peacefully 
and knowledgeably. When we look at his historical background, we 
will always see him at the center of attention. He always sat there 
surrounded by people. He always maintained a discrete silence that 
was only broken whenever people were anxious to hear his judgment 
and whenever they were in dispute. When he spoke he looked, as one 
of his contemporaries described, "as if light and pearls were 
emanating from his mouth rather than speech." He reached his high 
rank in knowledge and reverence when the Prophet (PBUH) was 
alive and maintained it after his death, notwithstanding his youth, 
for Mu‘aadh died during ‘Umar's caliphate at the age of thirty-three 
years. 


Mu*aadh was generous, magnanimous, well-mannered, and 
good-natured. If anyone asked him for money, he would readily and 
glady give it to him. His generosity made him spend all his money on 
charity and aid. When the Prophet (PBUH) died, Mu‘aadh was still 
in Yemen, where the Prophet (PBUH) had sent him with the task of 
teaching Muslims their religion and figh. 


When Mu‘aadh returned from Yemen during Abu Bakr's 
caliphate, ‘Umar Ibn Al Khattaab was informed that Mu‘aadh 
become wealthy, and he suggested to Abu Bakr that the community 
should have half of Mu*‘aadh's wealth. “Umar did not waste much 
time as he rushed to Mu‘aadh's house and told him about what he 
and Abu Bakr had agreed on. Mu*‘aadh was an honest and 
trustworthy man. The fact that he had made a fortune did not make 
him vulnerable to suspicion or sin; therefore, he turned down *Umar's 
suggestion and refuted his viewpoint. Finally, ‘Umar left him. The 
next day, Mu*‘aadh hurried towards ‘Umar's house and no sooner 
had he laid his eyes on him than he hugged him. His tears flowed as 
he said, " Last night, I saw in my dream that I was crossing deep 
water. I nearly drowned were it not for your help, “Umar.” 
Afterwards, they both went to Abu Bakr's presence where Mu‘aadh 
asked him to take half his money, but Abu Bakr said, " No, I will take 
nothing from you." “Umar glanced at Mu‘aadh and said, "Now it is 
halaal and blessed." 


First, the pious Abu Bakr would not take from Mu*aadh one 
penny unless he was absolutely positive that he had earned it in a 
lawful halaal way. Second, “Umar was not trying to accuse or cast 
suspicion on Mu‘aadh. In the final analysis, this epitomizes the 
era of ideals which was filled with people who were in perpetual 
competition to climb their way up to the apex of perfection allowed 
to human beings. Thus some of them soared up to the sky with their 
good deeds. Some were foremost and the rest followed a middle 
course. Yet, all of them were travelers on a caravan of goodness. 


* * * 


After a while, Mu’aadh emigrated to Syria, where he lived 
among its people and the expatriates as a teacher and a scholar of 
fiqgh. When Abu “Ubaidah, the governor of Syria and a close friend 
of Mu‘aadh, died, the Commander of the Faithful “Umar Ibn AI- 
Khattaab assigned Mu‘aadh to take his place as a ruler. Only a few 
months had elapsed after his taking over when he died, humble and 
repentant to Allah. “Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) used to 
say, "If I were to grant Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal succession and Allah asked 
me, 'Why did you make him your successor?’ I would readily 
answer, 'I heard Your Prophet (PBUH) say that when those who have 
knowledge stand before Almighty Allah, Mu‘aadh will be among 
them." 


The succession that ‘Umar meant here was not merely over a 
country or a governorship but over all the Muslim lands. When 
“Umar was asked before his death, "If you choose your successor 
now, we will give him our allegiance," he answered, "If Mu‘aadh Ibn 
Jabal were alive and I made him my successor to the caliphate, then I 
died and met Allah Who asked me, 'Whom did you assign to rule 
Muhammad's nation?’ I would answer, 'I assigned Mu‘aadh Ibn 
Jabal to rule it after I heard the Prophet (PBUH) say Mu‘aadh Ibn 
Jabal is the Imam of those who have knowledge of Judgment Day.'" 


The Prophet (PBUH) said one day, "O Mu‘aadh, by Allah I 
love you dearly, so do not forget to recite after every prayer, 
‘Allahhelp me in remembering You, in offering thanks to You, and in 
worshiping You properly.’ ” 


Indeed, the Prophet (PBUH) supplicated Allah to help him to 
remember Him. The Prophet (PBUH) persevered in stressing this 
great fact that tells people that authority belongs to Allah, He has the 
power over all, and there is no power or any might except with His 
permission, for He is Most High and Most Great. 


Definitely, Mu*aadh had learned and fully grasped this fact. 
He did his utmost to cherish and apply this fundamental basis in his 
life from that moment onwards. 


One day, the Prophet (PBUH) ran into him so he asked him, 
“How are you this morning Mu‘aadh?" He answered, "This morning | 
woke up as a true believer." The Prophet (PBUH) said, "Every truth 
has its manifestations, so what are the manifestations of your true 
belief ?" Mu‘aadh readily answered, "I have never woken up without 
believing that I might die before nightfall. 1 have never slept without 
believing that I might die before the morning and have never taken a 
step without believing that I might die before taking the next. It 
always seems to me that I can see each nation humbled to its knees 
and each nation called to its record of deeds. It always seems to me 
that I can see the dwellers of Paradise, wherein are delights 
everlasting, and the dwellers of Hell, wherein they are in disgracing 
torment." The Prophet (PBUH ) commented, "Now you know, so 
stick to the truth as long as you live." Indeed Mu*aadh had 
submitted himself and his destiny to Allah, for Allah was all that 
mattered to him. It was just that Ibn Mas‘uud described him as "an 
ummah, a leader having all the good and righteous qualities, obedient 
to Allah and hantifan , who worshipped none but Allah. We used to 
liken him to Ibraahiim (Abraham) (PBUH)." 


* * * 


Muraadh advocated knowledge and the remembrance of Allah. 
Moreover, he invited mankind to seek the useful and true knowledge 
saying, "I warn you against the deviation of wise men. You will know 
the truth when you see it, for it has a distinctive light!" He believed 
that worship was an end and a means to reach justice. One day a 
Muslim asked him, "Teach me." Mu‘aadh asked him, "Will you obey 
me if I teach you?" The man answered, "I will not disobey you in 
anything.” He said then, "Fast, then break your fast. Pray during the 
night but you must get some sleep. Earn what is halaal and what is 
rightfully yours and do not earn sin . Die as a true Muslim. Finally, | 
warn you against the supplication of those who have been wronged 
or oppressed." He believed that education meant knowledge and 
practice; therefore, he said, "Learn whatever you like to learn, yet 
Allah will not make your learning worthwhile unless you practice 
what you have learned." He believed that belief and remembrance of 
Allah meant the perpetual calling to mind of His greatness and the 


117 


perpetual calling of oneself to account for deeds before Allah does so. 


Al-Aswad Ibn Hilaal reported, As we were walking with 
Mu‘aadh one day, he said, "Let us sit down for a while to meditate 


on Allah." 


Perhaps the reason behind his discrete silence was his 
unremitting meditation and contemplation. 


Likewise, his once telling the Prophet (PBUH) that he never 
took a step without believing that he might die before taking the next 
was due to his engrossment in the remembrance of Allah and in 
calling himself to account for his deeds. 


At the end, death summoned Mu‘aadh. It was time to meet 
Allah. When the stupor of death creeps upon someone, his sub- 
conscious takes the reins and spurs the tongue — if it is able to — to 
disclose the reality of all mankind in concise words that summarize 
his life story. In those blessed moments, Mu‘aadh faintly uttered 
great words that revealed a great believer, for he gazed up into the 
sky and humbly supplicated Allah, the Most Merciful, saying, "Allah 
I used to fear You but now I| implore You. Allah, You know that I did 
not devote my life to travel in the lands or to earn money or property 
but rather consecrated it to knowledge, faith and obedience, 
notwithstanding intense heat or hardships." 


He stretched his hand as if he were shaking death and went 
into a coma. His last words were, "O Death, welcome! 


You are a long-awaited beloved. " 


At last Mu*‘aadh ascended to Allah's Paradise. 


(9) 
AL- MIQDAAD IBN “AMR 
The First Muslim Cavalryman 


His companions said about him, "The first cavalryman to strive 
in the way of Allah was Al-Miqdaad Ibn Al-Aswad, our hero, and 
Al-Miqdaad Ibn ‘Amr was one and the same person." 


The story behind this was that Al-Miqdaad Ibn ‘Amr was in 
alliance with Al-Aswad Ibn “Abd Yaghuuth, who therefore adopted 
Al-Miqdaad. Thus, he was called Al-Miqdaad Ibn Al-Aswad until 
the glorious verse which abrogated adoption descended, and he 
restored his father's name, “Amr Ibn Saad. Al-Miqdaad was one of 
the foremost Muslims and the seventh of the seven men who 
announced their Islam openly and in public. Therefore, he had his 
share of the Quraish's abuse and atrocities. He tolerated them with 
the courageousness and satisfaction of a devoted disciple. 


His attitude during the Battle of Badr will retain its immortal 
glory. It was an honorable attitude that impressed all those who 
witnessed it and made each and every one of them wish it were he 
who had adopted such an attitude. ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas*‘uud, the 
Companion of Allah's Prophet (PBUH) said, "I have seen Al- 
Miqdaad (May Allah be pleased with him) maintain a firm attitude 
and I was overtaken by a vicarious feeling to be in his place. This 
feeling enveloped me to the extent that I wished more than anything 
in the world that it would come true." 


The Day of Badr was a crucial one as the Quraish marched 
with all their might, stubborn persistence, and haughtiness against 
the Muslims. On that day, the Muslims were not only few, but also 
untried and inexperienced in jihaad. Their hearts had not been tested 
in action. Besides, the Battle of Badr was the dawn of their 
conquests. The Prophet stood there to strengthen the faith of his 
Companions and test their combat readiness to break through the 
enemy infantry and cavalry. 


Afterwards, the Prophet (PBUH) began to consult them on war 
tactics. Surely, the Prophet's Companions knew that when he asked 
their opinion, he demanded their individual free and courageous 
expression, even if it happened to contradict the majority. He who 
expressed his opinion would not be reproached or criticized. 


Al-Miqdaad was afraid lest one of the Muslims should have 
reservations about the imminent battle. Therefore, he was careful to 
have precedence in speech. His concise and decisive words coined 
the slogan of the battle, yet before he had the chance to open his 
mouth, Abu Bakr Ag-Siddiiq started talking and by the time he 
finished his words, Al - Miqdaad's apprehensions had vanished, for 
Abu Bakr spoke with remarkable eloquence. “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab 
spoke next and followed suit. Finally Al-Miqdaad stepped forward 
and said, "O Prophet of Allah, go ahead with what Allah has 
inspired you to do. We will stand by you. By Allah, we will never say 
as the Children of Israel said, ‘So go you and your Lord and fight you 
two, we are sitting right here.’ Instead, we will say, 'Go you and your 
Lord and we will fight with you.’ By Allah, Who has sent you with 
the truth, if you take us to the end of the world, we will tolerate all 
hardships until we reach it with you. We will fight on your left, your 
right, in front of you and behind you until Allah bestows victory on 
you." His decisive words were like bullets that made the righteous 
believers with them fired up with enthusiasm. 


The Prophet's face brightened as he uttered a pious 
supplication for Al-Miqdaad, whose words were so strong and 
decisive that they drew the pattern that would be followed by 
anyone who spoke afterwards. Indeed, Al-Miqdaad's words left their 
impact on the hearts of the believers. Consequently, S-ad Ibn 
Mu‘aadh, a leader of the Angaar, rose and said, "O Prophet of Allah, 
we have believed in you and witnessed that what has descended on 
you is the truth. We gave you our allegiance, so go ahead with what 
you intend to do, and we will stand by you. By Allah Who has 
sent you with the truth, if you attempt to cross the sea, we will cross 
it hand in hand with you. None of us will lag behind or turn his back 
on you. We are not afraid to meet our enemy tomorrow, for we are 
given to terrible warfare and we are faithful in our desire to meet 


120 


Allah. I pray Allah that we do what will make you proud of us. Go 
ahead with Allah's blessings.” 


The Prophet (PBUH) was extremely sanguine on hearing this 
and said to his Companions, "March forward and be cheerful and 
confident!" After a while the two armies met in fierce combat. The 
Muslim cavalry on that day were only three : Al-Miqdaad Ibn ‘Amr, 
Marthid Ibn Abi Marthid, and Az-Zubair Ibn Al “Awaam. The rest 
of the Mujaahiduun were infantry or riding on camels. 


% * * 


Al-Miqdaad's previous words not only proved his valor but 
also his preponderant wisdom and profound thought. 


Al-Miqdaad was a wise and intelligent man. His wisdom was 
not expressed in mere words but in empirical principles and a 
constant unvarying conduct. His experience was the fuel of his 
wisdom and intelligence. 


The Prophet (PBUH) once assigned him to rule one of the 
governorships, and when he returned the Prophet (PBUH) asked him, 
"How does it feel be a governor?" He answered with admirable 
honesty, "It made me feel as if I were in a silver tower above the rest 
of the people. By Allah Who has sent you with the truth, from now 
on, I will never expose myself to the temptations of governing.” 


If that was not wisdom, then what else is? If that was not a 
wise man, then who else is? 


This was an honest and straightforward man who was able to 
detect, unveil, and admit his innermost weakness. His position as a 
governor made him vulnerable to haughtiness and vainglory. He 
detected this weakness in himself at once and took a solemn oath to 
avoid any position or rank that might jeopardize his piety and 
righteousness. He kept his oath and renounced any influential or 
controversial situation for the rest of his life. 


He cherished and treasured the hadith of the Prophet (PBUH): 
"He who avoids fitnah (trials, afflictions, and error) is indeed a 
happy man." 


He realized that because the governorship awakened latent 
pride and haughtiness in him and exposed him to Fitnah, it was 
better to avoid any position that might arouse this weakness. His 
wisdom was manifested in his deliberateness and perseverance in his 
judgment of men. This was also a trait that Allah's Prophet (PBUH) 
instilled in him, for he taught Muslims that the hearts of the children 
of Adam are incredibly capricious. 


Al-Miqdaad was always for delaying his final judgment of a 
man to the moment of death so as to be absolutely positive that the 
man concerned would not alter, for death means finality. His 
wisdom was most conspicuous in the dialogue that was narrated by 
one of his companions: One day, we sat with Al-Miqdaad and a man 
passed by and addressed Al- Miqdaad saying, "All kinds of 
happiness are for these eyes which have seen Allah's Prophet 
(PBUH). By Allah, we wish that we saw what you have seen and 
witnessed what you have witnessed.” Al-Miqdaad approached him 
and said, "Why should anyone wish to witness a scene that Allah 
did not wish him to see? He does not know what it would have been 
like if he had witnessed it or which party he would have been among 
if he went back in time. By Allah, Allah's Prophet (PBUH) saw 
people who were thrown right into hell, so you should thank Allah 
that you were spared such a trial and were honored by firm belief in 
Allah and His Prophet (PBUH)." 


Undoubtedly, it is remarkable wisdom. You hardly ever meet a 
believer who loves Allah and the Prophet (PBUH) and does not wish 
to see and live within the Prophet's sight. Yet the insight of the wise 
and skillful Miqdaad unveiled the missing dimension of this wish. 
For is it not possible that if this man had lived during those times he 
might have ended up among the dwellers of Hell? Is it not possible 
that he might have sided with the disbelievers? Again, is it not far 
much better for him to thank Allah Who destined him to live at a time 


122 


when Islam is deeply - rooted and fully-fledged, awaiting him to 
quench his thirst from its inexhaustible pure spring? 


Al-Miqdaad's viewpoint was subtly wise and intelligent. He 
always emerged as the wise and clever man in all his actions, deeds, 
and words. 


Al-Miqdaad's love for Islam was not only great but also 
reasonable and wise. A man who has such great and wise love inside 
him must be raised to a high station, for he does not find pleasure in 
this love per se but rather in its responsibilities and obligations. Al- 
Miqdaad definitely was this type of man. His love for the Prophet 
filled his heart and deepened his feeling of responsibility towards the 
Prophet's safety. No sooner was a call for an expedition announced 
than he darted towards the Prophet's house on horseback armed with 
his sharp sword! 


His love for Islam filled his heart with responsibility for its 
protections, not only from the plots of its enemies, but also from the 
errors of its allies. 


One day, his army unit went on an expedition, but the enemy 
troops were able to besiege them. Therefore, their commander gave 
an order to his soldiers not to graze their camels. One of the Muslim 
soldiers did not hear his order and, in consequence, disobeyed it. The 
commander punished him severely, more than he actually deserved. 
In fact, he did not deserve to be punished at all. Al-Miqdaad passed 
by this man and found him in tears, so he asked him what was the 
matter, and the latter told him what had happened. Al-Miqdaad 
took the man to the commander, where he argued with him until he 
was convinced of his error of judgment. Then Al- Miqdaad said, 
"Now it is the time for retaliation. He must have his gisaas - the 
law of equality of punishment!" 


The commander yielded to his judgment but the soldier 
remitted the retaliation. Al-Miqdaad was thrown into ectasy over 


123 


the greatness of the religion that made it possible for them to reach 
this power of courageous judgment, admirable submission, and great 
forgiveness. He said as if he were singing a song, "I will see Islam 
triumphant even if I have to die for it." Indeed, it was his utmost 
wish to see Islam most powerful before he died. His extraordinary 
effort to make his wish come true made the Prophet (PBUH) say to 
him, "O Al-Miqdaad, Allah ordered me to love you and told me that 
He loves you." 


(10) 
SA‘IID IBN “AAMIR 
Greatness Under Worn-out Garments 


Does any of us know this man or have any of us ever heard his 
name before? Most probably, the majority of us, if not all, have not 
heard his name mentioned before. I imagine that you wonder, who is 
Sa‘iid Ibn “Aamir? Well, you are about to embark ona journey back 
in time so as to find out all that there is to be known about this 
"happy" ("Sa‘iid" means "happy ") man, so fasten your seat belts. 


* * * 


In short, Sa‘iid was one of the outstanding Companions of the 
Prophet (PBUH), notwithstanding the fact that his name was 
seldom, if ever, mentioned. He was one of the most distinguished 
unknown pious Companions. It was natural that he, like all Muslims, 
would accompany the Prophet (PBUH) in all his expeditions and 
battles, for as a believer, he could not lag or turn his back on Allah's 
Prophet (PBUH) in peace or war time. Shortly before the Conquest 
of Khaibar, Sa‘iid submitted himself to Islam. Ever since he 
embraced Islam and gave his allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH)), he 
consecrated his life, existence, and destiny to the service of Islam. 
All the great virtues of obedience, asceticism, dignity, humbleness, 
piety, and pride thrived harmoniously inside this pure and kind man. 


In our attempt to unveil his greatness, we must bear in mind 
that, in most cases, appearance contrasts with reality. If we are to 
judge him by his outer looks, we will not do him justice, for he was 
defintely ill-favored as regards his appearance. He had dusty 
uncombed hair. Nothing in his looks or appearance distinguished him 
from poor Muslims. If we are to judge his reality by his 
appearance, we will see nothing impressive or breath-taking. But if 
we dive deep into his inner self beyond his outer appearance, we will 
see greatness in the full meaning of the word. His greatness stood 
aloof from the splendor and ornament of life. Yet, it lurked there 
beyond his modest appearance and worn-out garments. Have you 


ever seen a pearl hidden inside its shell? Well, he was much like this 
hidden pearl. 


* * * 


When the Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Iban Al- Khattaab 
dismissed Mu*aawiyah from his position as governor of Homs in 
Syria, he exerted himself in searching for someone who was qualified 
to take over his position. 


Undoubtedly, ‘Umar's standards of choice of governors and 
assistants were highly cautious, meticulous, and scrutinizing. He 
believed that if a governor committed a sin, error, or violation, two 
people would be asked to account for it before Allah: “Umar and the 
governor, even if this governor were in the farthest corner of the earth. 
His standards of estimation and evaluation of governors were highly 
subtle, alert, and perceiving. Centuries before the advent of Islam, 
Homs_ was a big city that witnessed, one after the other, the dawn 
and eclipse of many civilizations. Besides, it was a vital trade center. 
The attractions of the vast city turned it into a place of seduction and 
temptation. In *‘Umar's opinion only an ascetic, devout, and 
repentant worshiper would be able to resist and renounce its 
attractions. 


“Umar suddenly realized that Sa‘iid Ibn “Aamir was the man 
he was looking for and cried out, "Sa‘iid Ibn ‘Aamir is the right man 
for this mission." He summoned him. Sa*iid was offered the 
governorship by the Commander of the Faithful, but he refused 
saying, "Do not expose me to Fitnah (trials and affliction).". “Umar 
then cried out, "By Allah, I will not let you turn me down. 


Do you lay the burdens of your trusteeship and the caliphate 
upon my shoulders, then you refuse to help me out? " Instantly, 
Sa*‘iid was convinced of the logic of ‘Umar's words. Indeed, it was 
not fair to abandon or avoid their obligation towards their 
trusteeship and towards the caliphate and lay them on ~“Umar's 
shoulders. Moreover, if people like Sa*‘iid Ibn ~Aamir renounced the 
responsibility of rule, then*Umar would definitely have a hard 


time to find aman who was highly pious and righteous enough to 
be entrusted with such a mission. 


Hence, Sa*iid traveled with his wife to Syria. They were newly- 
wed. Ever since his bride was a little girl, she had been an exquisitely 
blooming beauty. “Umar gave him a considerable sum of money at 
the time of his departure. 


When they settled down in Syria, his wife wanted to use this 
money, so she asked him to buy appropriate garments, upholstery, 
and furniture, and to save the rest of it. Sa*iid said to her, "I have a 
better idea. We are in a country with profitable trade and brisk 
markets, so it would be better to give this money to a merchant so as 
to invest it." She said, “But if he loses it ?" Sa‘iid said, "I will make 
him a guarantee that the amount will be paid notwithstanding.” She 
answered, "All right then ." 


Of course, Sa*iid went out and bought the necesseties for an 
ascetic life, then gave all his money in voluntary charity in Allah's 
cause to the poor and those in need. Time went by, and every now 
and then his wife would ask him about their money and their profits 
and he would answer, "It isa highly profitable trade." 


One day, she asked him the same question before one of his 
relatives who knew what he had done with the money. His relative 
smiled, then he could not help laughing in a way that made Sa*iid's 
wife suspicious. Therefore, she prevailed on him to tell her the 
truth. He told her, “Sa‘iid on that day gave all his money in 
voluntary charity in Allah's cause." Sa*iid's wife was broken-hearted, 
for not only had she lost her last chance to buy what she wanted but 
also lost all their money. Sa‘iid gazed at her sad, meek eyes 
glistening with tears that only added more charm and grace to her 
eyes; yet before he yielded to this fascinating figure, he perceived 
Paradise inhabited by his late friends and said, "I had companions 
who preceded me in ascending to Allah and you will not deviate from 
the path they have taken, not for the world.” He was afraid lest her 
excelling beauty should make her disobey him; therefore he said as if 
he were talking to himself, "You know that Paradise is filled with 


127 


Houris, fair females with wide and lovely eyes as wives for the pious, 
who are extremely lovely. If one of them had a peep at the earth, she 
would illuminate it with her light that combines the light of both the 
earth and the moon. So you should not blame me if I chose to 
sacrifice your love for their love and not vice versa." Throughout his 
talk, he was calm, pleased, and satisfied. His wife was peaceful, for 
she realized that she had no choice but to follow Sa‘iid's example 
and adopt herself to his rigid, ascetic, and pious way of life. 


* * * 


Homs, at that time was called the second Kufa. The reason 
behind this was that its people were easily stirred and swayed to 
revolt against their governors. Homs was named after Al-Kufa in 
Iraq, which was notorious for endless mutiny and uprisings. 


Although, the people of Homs were given to mutiny, as we have 
already mentioned, Allah guided their hearts to His righteous slave 
Sa*iid. Thus, they loved and obeyed him. 


One day, ‘Umar said to him, "I find it rather strange that the 
people of Syria love and obey you.” Sa*iid answered, "Maybe they 
love me because | help and sympathize with them." 


Despite the love of the people of Homs for Sa*iid, their innate 
rebellious disposition got the better of them. Hence, sounds of 
discontent and complaint began to be heard, thus proving that 
Homs was not called the second Kufa in vain. One day, as the 
Commander of the Faithful was visiting Homs, he asked its people 
who gathered around him for their opinion of Sa‘iid. Some made 
complaints against him which were blessings in disguise, for they 
unveiled an impressively great man. 


“Umar asked the criticizing group to state their complaints one 
by one. The representative of the group stood up and said, "We have 
four complaints against Sa‘iid : First, he doesn't come out of his 
house until the sun rises high and the day becomes hot. Second, he 
does not see anyone at night. Third, there are two days in every 


128 


month in which he doesn't leave his house at all. Fourth, he faints 
every now and then, and this annoys us although he can't help it." 
The man sat down and ‘Umar was silent for a while for he was 
secretly supplicating Allah saying , "Allah, I know that he is one of 
Your best slaves. Allah, I beseech You not to make me disappointed 
in him." He summoned Sa‘iid to defend himself. Sa*iid replied, "As 
for their complaint that I do not get out of my house before noon, by 
Allah I hate to explain the reason that made me do that, but I have to 
do so. The reason is that my wife does not have a servant, so I knead 
my dough, wait for it to rise, bake my bread, perform ablution and 
pray Duha, then I go out of my house." ~Umar's face brightened as 
he said, " All praises and thanks be to Allah." Then he urged him to 
refute the rest of the allegations. Sa‘iid went on, " As for their 
complaint that I do not meet anyone at night, by Allah, I hate to say 
the reason, but you force me to. Anyway, I have devoted the day to 
them and consecrated the night for Allah. As for the third complaint 
that they do not see me two days per month, well, I do not have a 
servant to wash my garment and I have no spare one. Therefore, I 
wash it and wait for it to dry shortly before sunset, then I go out of 
my house to meet them. My defense against the last complaint of 
the fainting fits is that saw with my own eyes Khubaib Al-Ansaariy 
being slain in Makkah. The Quraish cut his body into small Pieces 
and said, ‘Do you want to save yourself and see Muhammad in your 
place instead?’ He answered, ‘By Allah, I will not accept your offer 
of setting me free to return to my family safe and sound, even if you 
gave me all the splendors and ornaments of life in return for exposing 
the Prophet (PBUH) to the least annoyance, even if it was a prick of 
a thorn.' Now, every time this scene of me standing there as a 
disbeliever, watching Khubaib being tortured to death and doing 
nothing to save him flickers in my mind, I find myself shaking with 
fear of Allah's punishment and I faint." 


These were Sa‘iid's words which left his lips that were already 
wet from the flow of his pure and pious tears. The overjoyed “Umar 
could not help but cry out, "All praises and thanks be to Allah Who 


129 


would not make me disappointed in you!" He hugged Sa*iid and 
kissed his graceful and dignified forehead. 


% * * 


What a great guidance must have been bestowed on those 
outstanding men! What an excellent instructor Allah's Prophet 
(PBUH) must have been! What a penetrating light must have 
emanated from Allah's Book! What an inspiring and instructive 
school Islam must have been! I wonder if the earth can take in so 
much of the piety and righteousness of those fortunate men. | 
presume that if that happened, then we would no longer call it the 
earth but rather Paradise. Indeed the "Promised Paradise." 


Since it is not time for Paradise yet, it is only natural that 
those glorious superior men who pass by life are but few, very few. 
Sa‘iid Ibn “Aamir was definitely one of those superior Muslims. 


His position allowed him a considerable salary, yet he took 
only enough money to buy the necessities for himself and his wife and 
gave the rest in voluntary charity in the way of Allah. One day, he 
was urged to spend this surplus on his family and relatives, yet he 
answered, "Why should I give it to my family and relatives? No, by 
Allah, I will not sell Allah's pleasure to seek my kinfolks' pleasure." 


He was later urged, "Spend more money on yourself and on 
your family and try to enjoy the lawful good things." But he always 
answered, "I will not stay behind the foremost Muslims after I heard 
the Prophet (PBUH) say, ‘When Almighty Allah gathers all people 
on the Day of Reckoning, the poor believers will step forward in 
solemn procession. They will be asked to stop for reckoning but they 
will answer confidently: We have nothing to account for. Allah will 
say: My slaves said the truth. Hence, they will enter Paradise before 
all other people.’ " 


130 


In A.H. 20, Sa‘iid met Allah with a pure record, pious heart, 
and honorable history. He yearned for so long to be among the 
foremost Muslims; in fact, he consecrated his life to fulfil their 
covenant and follow in their footsteps. He yearned for so long for his 
Prophet (PBUH) and instructor and his pure and repentant 
comrades. He left all the burdens, troubles, and hardships of life 
behind. He had nothing but his pious, ascetic, awesome, and great 
inner self. These virtues made the balance of good deeds heavy 
rather than light. He impressed the world with his qualities rather 
than with his conceit. 


* * * 
Peace be upon Sa‘iid Ibn “Aamir. Peace be upon his life and 
resurrection. Peace be upon the honorable and obedient Companions 
of the Prophet and blessings and peace be upon him. 


(11) 
HAMZAH IBN ‘ABD AL-MUTTALIB 
The Lion of Allah and The Martyr of Martyrs 


After a day full of work, worship, and entertainment, the 
people of Makkah fell into a deep sleep. The people of the Quraish 
were turning in their beds except for one who forsook his bed of 
sleep. He used to go to bed early, rest for a few hours, then wake up 
in great anxiety for the expected appointment with Allah. He went 
to the praying corner in his room to supplicate to his God. Whenever 
his wife awakened upon hearing the voice of his long supplications, 
she shed tears out of warm sympathy and asked him not to take it so 
hard and to get some sleep. He only answered her in tears, "The time 
for sleep is over, Khadiijah." At that time Muhammad was not yet a 
serious problem for the Quraish, although he had started to draw 
their attention as he started to spread his call secretly; those who 
believed in him were still quite few. 


There were people among the non-believers who loved and 
respected him. They yearned to declare their belief in him and 
become one of his followers, but their fear of the prevailing norms and 
the pressure of inherited traditions prevented them. Among them 
was Hamzah Ibn “Abdul Muttalib, the Prophet's paternal uncle who 
was at the same time his brother through fosterage (i.e. they had been 
breast-fed by the same woman). 


* * + 


Hamzah was fully aware of the greatness of his nephew and of 
the truth he came with. He used to know him not only as a nephew, 
but also as a brother and friend because they both belonged to the 
same generation. They always played together and walked together 
on the same road of life step by step. But in their youth they 
departed, each one in his own way: Hamzah preferred the life of 
leisure, trying to take his place among the prominent leaders of the 


Quraish and Makkah, while Muhammad chose the life of seclusion 
away from the crowd, immersed in the deep spiritual meditation that 
prepared him to receive the truth. 


Despite the fact that each of them had a different way of living 
out his own youth, Hamzah was always attentive to the virtues of his 
friend and nephew. Such virtues helped Muhammad to win a special 
place in the hearts of people and helped to draw a clear outline for 
his great future. 


The next day, Hamzah went out as usual. At the Ka*bah he 
found a number of Quraishi noblemen. He sat with them, listening to 
what they had to say: they were talking about Muhammad. For the 
first time Hamzah saw them worried about the call his nephew was 
propagating with a tone of bitterness and rage marking their voices. 
Before that, they had never paid attention — at least they had 
pretended not to do so — but on that day their faces looked 
perplexed, upset, and aggressive. 


Hamzah laughed at their talks and accused them of 
exaggeration. Abu Jahl said to his companions that Hamzah was the 
best one to know the danger of his nephew's call and that he 
pretended to underestimate this danger till the Quraish would relax 
so much that when they awakened it would be after his nephew had 
complete control over them. 


They kept talking and threatening while Hamzah sat, 
sometimes smiling, sometimes frowning. When they dispersed his 
head was full of new ideas about the issues of his nephew that they 
had discussed in his presence. 


* * * 


Days passed and the Quraish's whispering about the Prophet's 
call increased. Later, whispering turned into provocation and 
Hamzah watched from a distance. His nephew's composed, 
steadfast attitude towards their provocations puzzled him. Such an 


attitude was quite unfamiliar to the Bani Quraish, who were 
themselves known to be strong and challenging. 


If doubts of the greatness and truth of Muhammad could steal 
into anyone's heart, they would have never stolen into Hamzah's 
heart, because he was the best one to know Muhammad from his 
early childhood to his youth, then to his proud, honest manhood. 
Hamzah knew Muhammad as he knew himself and maybe more. 
Since they had come into life together, grown up together, and 
attained full strength together, Muhammad's life had been as pure 
and clear as the sunlight. It never occurred to Hamzah that 
Muhammad could make an error or a doubtful act in his life. He 
never saw Muhammad angry, hopeless , greedy, careless, or unstable. 


Hamzah was not only physically strong, but was also wise and 
strong-willed. Therefore, it was natural for him to follow a man in 
whose honesty and truthfulness he wholeheartedly believed. Thus he 
kept a secret in his heart that was soon going to be disclosed. 


Then came the day. Hamzah went out of his house towards the 
desert carrying his bow to practice his favorite sport of hunting (in 
which he was very skilled). He spent most of his day there. On his 
way home he passed by the Ka*bah as usual, to circumambulate it. 


Near the Ka*bah, a female servant of ~Abd Allah Ibn Jud'aan 
saw him and said, "O Abu ‘Umaarah! You haven't seen what 
happened to your nephew at the hands of Abu Al-Hakam [bn 
Hishaam. When he saw Muhammad sitting there, he hurt him and 
called him bad names and treated him in a way that he hated." She 
went on to explain what Abu Jahl had done to the Prophet of Allah. 


Hamzah listened to her carefully and paused for a while, then 
with his right hand he picked up his bow and put it on his shoulder. 
He walked with fast, steady steps towards the Ka‘bah, hoping to 
meet Abu Jahl there. He decided that if he did not find him, he 
would search for him everywhere till he did. 


134 


As soon as he reached the Ka‘bah he glanced at Abu Jahl sitting 
in the yard in the middle of the Quraishi noblemen. Hamzah 
advanced very calmly towards Abu Jahl and hit him with his bow on 
the head till it broke the skin and bled. To everybody's surprise, 
Hamzah shouted, "You dare to insult Muhammad while I follow his 
religion and I say what he says? Come and retaliate upon me. Hit 
me if you can." In a moment they all forgot how their leader Abu Jahl 
had been insulted and they were all thunderstruck by the news that 
Hamzah had converted to Muhammad's religion and that he saw 
what Muhammad saw and said what he said. Could Hamzah really 
have converted to Islam when he was the strongest and most 
dignified Quraishi young man? 


Such was the overwhelming disaster to which the Quraish were 
helpless, because Hamzah's conversion would attract others from the 
elite to do the same. Thus Muhammad's call would be supported, 
and he would find enough solidarity that the Quraish might wake up 
one day to find their idols being pulled down. 


Indeed, Hamzah had converted, and he announced what he 
had kept secret in his heart for so long. 


+ * * 


Again Hamzah picked up his bow, put it on his shoulder, 
and with steady steps and full strength left the place with everyone 
looking disappointed and Abu Jahl licking the blood flowing from his 
wounded head. 


Hamzah possessed a sharp sight and clear consciousness. He 
went home, and after he had relaxed from the day's exhaustion he 
sat down to think over what had happened. He had announced it in 
a moment of indignation and rage. He hated to see his nephew 
getting insulted and suffering injustice with no one to help him. Such 
racial zeal for the honor of Bani Haashim's talk had made him hit 
Abu Jahl on the head and shout declaring his Islam. But was that the 
ideal way for anyone to change the religion of his parents and 


135 


ancestors and to embrace a new religion whose teachings he had not 
yet become familiar with and whose true reality he had not acquired 
sufficient knowledge of? It was true that Hamzah had never had 
any doubts about Muhammad's integrity, but could anybody 
embrace a new religion with all its responsibilities just in a moment 
of rage as Hamzah had done? 


It was true that he had always kept in his heart a great respect 
for the new call his nephew was carrying and its banner, but what 
should the right time have been to embrace this religion if he was 
destined to embrace it? Should it be a moment of indignation and 
anger or a moment of deep reflection? Thus he was inspired by a 
clear consciousness to reconsider the whole situation in light of strict 
and meticulous thinking. 


Hamzah started thinking. He spent many restless days and 
sleepless nights. When one tries to attain the truth by the power of 
mind, uncertainty will become a means of knowledge, and this is 
what happened to Hamzah. Once he used his mind to search Islam 
and to weigh between the old religion and the new one, he started to 
have doubts raised by his innate inherited nostalgia for his father's 
religion and by the natural fear of anything new. All his memories of 
the Ka*bah, the idols, the statues and the high religious status these 
idols bestowed on the Quraish and Makkah were raised. 


It appeared to him that denying all this history and the ancient 
religion was like a big chasm which had to be crossed. Hamzah was 
amazed at how a man could depart from the religion of his father 
that early and that fast. He regretted what he had done but he went 
on with the journey of reasonable thinking. But at that moment, he 
realized that his mind was not enough and that he should resort 
sincerely to the unseen power. At the Kabah he prayed and 
supplicated to heaven, seeking help from every light that existed in 
the universe to be guided to the right path. 


Let us hear him narrating his own story: IJ regretted having 
departed from the religion of my father and kin, and I was in a 


136 


terrible state of uncertainty and could not sleep. I came to the Kabah 
and supplicated to Allah to open my heart to what was right and to 
eliminate all doubts from it. Allah answered my prayer and filled my 
heart with faith and certainty. In the morning I went to the Prophet 
(PBUH) informing him about myself, and he prayed to Allah that He 
may keep my heart stable in this religion. 


In this way Hamzah converted to Islam, the religion of 
certainty. 


* + * 


Allah supported Islam with Hamzah's conversion. He was 
strong in defending the Prophet of Allah (PBUH) and the helpless 
amongst his Companions. When Abu Jahl saw him among the 
Muslims, he realized that war was inevitably coming. Therefore he 
began to support the Quraish to ruin the Prophet and his 
Companions. He wanted to prepare for a civil war to relieve his 
heart of anger and bitter feelings. 


Hamzah was unable, of course, to prevent all the harm alone, 
but his conversion was a shield that protected the Muslims, and was 
the first source of attraction to many tribes to embrace Islam. The 
second source was “Umar Ibn Al-Khattab's conversion, after which 
people entered Allah's religion in crowds. Since his conversion, 
Hamzah devoted all his life and power to Allah and His religion till 
the Prophet (PBUH) honored him with the noble title, "The Lion of 
Allah and of His Messenger". 


The first military raid launched by the Muslims against their 
enemies was under the command of Hamzah. The first banner that 
the Prophet handed to any Muslim was to Hamzah. In the battle of 
Badr, when the two conflicting parties met, the Lion of Allah and of 
His Messenger was there performing great wonders. 


+ * * 


137 


The defeated remnants of the Quraish army went back to 
Makkah stumbling in disappointment. Abu Sufyaan was broken- 
hearted with a bowed head as he left on the battlefield the dead 
bodies of the Quraish martyrs such as Abu Jahl, ~Utbah Ibn Rabii‘ah, 
Shaibah Ibn Rabii‘ah, Umaiyah Ibn Khalaf, ‘Uqbah Ibn Abi Mu‘ait, 
Al-Aswad Ibn “Abdul Al-Asad Al-Makhzumi, Al- Waliid Ibn 
“Utbah, Al-Nafr Ibn Al-Haarith, Al--Aas Ibn Sa‘iid, Ta*mah Ibn 
“Addi and tens of other great Quraish. 


But the Quraish would not accept the defeat easily. They 
started to prepare the army and to pull together all powers to avenge 
their honor and their dead. They insisted to continue the war. In 
the Battle of Uhud, all the Quraish went to war together with their 
allies from the Arabs, under the leadership of Abu Sufyaan once 
again. 


The Quraishi leaders had targeted two persons in the new 
battle, namely, the Prophet (PBUH) and Hamzah (May Allah be 
pleased with him). If one had heard them talking and plotting before 
the war, one would realize that Hamzah was their second main target 
after the Prophet (PBUH). 


Before they went to war, they had already chosen the person in 
charge of assassinating Hamzah: an Abyssinian slave with extra- 
ordinary skill in spear throwing. They planned for him to kill 
Hamzah, his only role being to hit him with a deadly spear. They 
warned him not to be busy with any other preoccupation other than 
Hamzah, regardless of the situation on the battlefield. They 
promised him the excellent reward of his freedom. The slave, whose 
name was Wahshiy, was owned by Jubair Ibn Mut*am. Jubair's uncle 
had been killed in the Battle of Badr, so Jubair said to Wahshiy, "Go 
out with the army, and if you kill Hamzah you will be free." 
Afterwards, the Quraish sent Wahshiy to Hind Bint ‘Utbah, Abu 
Sufyaan's wife, to give him more encouragement to kill Hamzah, 
because she had lost her father, uncle, brother, and son and it was 
said that Hamzah had been behind their deaths. 


138 


This was the reason why Hind was the most enthusiastic one of 
all the Quraish to escalate the war. All she wanted was Hamzah's 
head, whatever the cost might be. She spent days before the battle 
pouring all her rage into Wahshiy';s heart and making the plans for 
him. She promised him if he killed Hamzah she would give him her 
most precious trinkets. With her hateful fingers she held her precious 
pearl earrings and a number of golden necklaces around her neck and 
gazed at him saying, "All these are yours if you kill Hamzah." 


Wahshiy's mouth watered for the offer, and his soul yearned 
for the battle after which he would win his freedom and cease to be a 
slave, in addition to all the jewelry decorating the neck of the 
leading woman of the Quraish, the wife of its leader, and the 
daughter of its master. It was clear then that the whole war and the 
whole conspiracy were decisively seeking Hamzah. 


* * * 


The Battle of Uhud started and the two armies met. Hamzah 
was in the middle of the battlefield in battle dress and on his bosom 
he put an ostrich feather that he used to wear while fighting. He was 
moving everywhere cutting off the head of each polytheist he reached 
among the army of the Quraish. It seemed that death was at his 
command. Whenever he ordered it for anyone it reached him in the 
heart. 


The Muslims were about to gain victory and the defeated army 
of the Quraish started to withdraw in fright, but the Muslim archers 
left their places on the mountain to collect the spoils of war that the 
Quraish had left. If they had not left their places, giving the Quraish 
cavalry the chance to find a way, the battle would have ended as a 
gigantic grave for all the Quraish, including men, women, horses, and 
even cattle. 


The Quraish attacked the Muslims by surprise from the back 
and started striking them with thirsty swords. The Muslims tried to 
pull themselves together, picking up the weapons they had put down 


139 


upon seeing the Quraish withdrawing, but the attack was too violent. 
When Hamzah saw what had happened, he doubled his strength and 
his activity. Hamzah was striking all around him while Wahshiy was 
observing him, waiting for the right moment. Let us hear Wahshiy 
himself describe the scene. 


I was an Abyssinian man who used to throw the spear in an 
Abyssinian way that scarcely misses its target. When the armies met 
I searched for Hamzah till I found him in the middle of the crowd 
like a huge camel. He was killing every one around him with his 
sword. Nothing could stop him. By Allah, I prepared for him. I 
wanted him. I hid behind a tree so that I might attack him or he might 
come close to me. At that moment Sabaa‘u Ibn ~Abd Al-Uzzaa 
approached him before me. When Hamzah glanced at him he 
shouted, "Come to me, you son of the one who circumcises!" and he 
hit him directly in the head. Then I shook my spear till I was in full 
control over it and threw it. The spear penetrated him from the back 
and came out from between his legs. He rose to reach me but could 
not and soon died. I came to his body and took my spear and went 
back to sit in the camp. I didn't want anything else to do with him. I 
killed him only to be free. 


Let Wahshiy continue his story: When I returned to Makkah, 
they set me free. I stayed there till the Prophet (PBUH) entered 
Makkah on the Day of the Conquest. I fled to At-Taa'if. When the 
delegation of Al-Taa'if went to declare their conversion to Islam, I 
heard various people say that I should go to Syria or Yemen or any 
other place. While I was in such distress, a man said to me, "Woe to 
you! The Prophet (PBUH) never kills anyone entering his religion." I 
went to Allah's Prophet (PBUH) in Al- Madiinah, and the moment he 
first saw me I was already giving my true testimony. When he saw 
me he said, "Is it you, Wahshiy?" I said, "Yes, Messenger of Allah." 
He said, "Tell me, how did you kill Hamzah?" I told him, and when | 
finished he told me, "Woe to you! Get out of my sight and never 
show your face to me." From that time, I always avoided wherever 
the Prophet (PBUH) went lest he should see me, till he died. 


140 


Afterwards, when the Muslims fought Musailamah the Liar in 
the Battle of Al-Yamaamah, I went with them. I took with me the 
same spear that I had killed Hamzah with. When the armies met, I 
saw Musailamah standing with his sword in his hand. | prepared for 
him, shook my spear till 1 had full control over it, threw it, and it 
went into his body. If I killed with this spear the best of people, 
Hamzah, I wish that Allah may forgive me, as I killed with it the 
worst of people, Musailamah. 


Thus the Lion of Allah and of His Messenger died as a great 
martyr. His death was as unusual as his life, because it was not 
enough for his enemies to kill him. They sacrificed all the men and 
money of the Quraish to a battle only seeking the Prophet (PBUH) 
and his uncle Hamzah. 


Hind Bint “Utbah, the wife of Abu Sufyaan, ordered Wahshiy 
to bring her Hamzah's liver, and he responded to her savage desire. 
When he returned to her, he delivered the liver to her with his right 
hand, while taking the necklaces with the left as a reward for the 
accomplished task. Hind, whose father had been killed in the Battle 
of Badr and whose husband was the leader of the polytheist army, 
chewed Hamzah's liver hoping to relieve her heart, but the liver was 
too tough for her teeth so she spat it out and stood up shouting her 
poem: 


For Badr we've paid you better 

In a war more flaring than the other. 

I was not patient to revenge the murder of 
“Utbah, my son, and my brother. 

My vow's fulfilled, my heart's relieved forever. 


The battle ended and the polytheists mounted their camels and 
led their horses back to Makkah. The Prophet (PBUH) and his 
Companions examined the battlefield to see the martyrs. There, in 
the heart of the valley, the Prophet (PBUH) was examining the 


141 


faces of his Companions who had offered their souls to their Lord 
and had given their lives as a precious sacrifice to Him. 


The Prophet (PBUH) suddenly stood up and gazed in an upset 
manner at what he saw. He ground his teeth and closed his eyes. He 
never imagined that the Arabic moral code could be that savage so 
as to cut and disfigure a dead body in the dreadful way that had 
happened to his uncle, the Lion of Allah, Hamzah Ibn ‘Abd AI- 
Muttalib. The Prophet (PBUH) opened his shining eyes and looked 
at the dead body of his uncle saying, "I will never have a worse loss 
in my life than yours. I have never been more outraged than I am 
now." 


Then he turned to his Companions saying, "It is only for the 
sake of Safiyah [Hamzah's sister] that she should be grieved and that 
it should be taken as a practice after me. Otherwise, I would have 
ordered him to be left without burying so that he may be in the 
stomachs of beasts and in the craws of birds. If Allah destines me to 
win over the Quraish, I will cut thirty of them into pieces.” 


Therefore, the Companions shouted, "By Allah, if one day we 
conquer them, we will cut them in a way that no Arab has done 
before!" Allah honored Hamzah by making his death a great lesson 
for the Muslims to learn justice and mercy, even in situations when 
penalties and retaliation were justified. No sooner had the Prophet 
finished his threatening words, then a revelation came down to him 
while he was still standing in his place with the following verse: < 
Call mankind to the Way of your Lord with wisdom and sound 
advice, and reason with them in a well mannered way. Indeed your 
Lord is well aware of those who have gone astray from His way, and 
He is well aware of those who are guided. And if you retaliate, let 
your retaliation be to the extent that you were afflicted, but if you 
are patient, it will certainly be best for those who are patient; and 
be patient, yet your patience is only with the help of GOD, and do 
not sorrow for them, not distress yourself at what they devise. 
Indeed GOD is with those who are pious, and those who are doers of 
good > (16:125-127). 


142 


The revelation of these verses in this situation was the best 
honor for Hamzah. As stated before, the Prophet (PBUH) loved him 
dearly because he was not only an uncle, but also his brother by 
fosterage, his playmate in childhood, and the best friend in all his 
life. 


The Prophet (PBUH) did not find any better farewell for 
Hamzah than praying for him among the numerous martyrs. 
Hamzah's body was carried to the place of prayer on the battlefield, 
in the same place which had witnessed his bravery and embraced his 
blood. The Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions prayed for him, 
then they brought another martyr and put him beside Hamzah, and 
prayed for him. Then they took the martyr away and left Hamzah 
and brought the next martyr and placed him beside Hamzah and 
prayed for him and so on. They brought all the martyrs, one after the 
other and prayed for them beside Hamzah, who on that day was 
prayed for seventy times (the number of martyrs). 


* * * 


On his way from the battlefield, the Prophet (PBUH) heard the 
women of Bani “Abd Al- Ashhal lamenting their martyrs and he said, 
"But Hamzah has no one to lament him." Sa*d Ibn Mu‘aadh heard 
this sentence and thought that the Prophet (PBUH) would be 
satisfied if the women would lament his uncle. He hurried to the 
women of Bani “Abd Al-Ashhal and ordered them to lament 
Hamzah. When the Prophet (PBUH) heard them doing this he said, 
"I did not mean this. Go back, may Allah have mercy on you. There 
will be no crying anymore." The Prophet's (PBUH) Companions 
began to say their eulogies for Hamzah in praise of his virtues. The 
poet Hassaan Ibn Thaabit said in the course of a long poem: 


Moan for Hamzah, the one 

Who won't forget your horse which was old. 
He spurs horses when away they run 

Like lions in jungles. He's strong and bold, 
Whiter than Haashim. He looks in the sun 


143 


Except for the night, his tongue never told 
Among your swords, in was he done, 
Paralyzed be the hands that Wahshiy has sold." 


*Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah also said: 


I moaned, but what did moaning do for me? 
When they said Hamzah the Lion was killed 
Abu Ya‘ liy, a man with honor was filled 
For your death, pillars down were pulled. 


* * * 


Safiyah, Hamzah's sister and the Prophet's (PBUH) aunt said: 


To the happy Paradise of Allah he was invited. 
Such a destiny for Hamzah was what we wanted, 
I won't forget you if I stayed or departed. 

I moan for a lion by whom Islam was protected. 
O brother, may Allah for what you did 

Make you rewarded. 


But the best words said about him were those of the Prophet 
(PBUH) when he first saw him among the martyrs: "May Allah have 
mercy on you. You were, as far as I knew, always uniting blood 
relations and doing all sorts of goodness.” 


The loss of Hamzah was great and nothing could console the 
Prophet (PBUH) for it. But to his surprise, Allah offered him the best 
consolation. When he was walking home from Uhud, he saw a 
woman from the Bani Diinaar whose husband, father, and brother 
had been killed in the battle. She asked the returning Muslim soldiers 
about the battle. When they told her of the death of her father, 
husband, and brother, she soon asked them anxiously, "What about 
the Prophet of Allah ?" They said, “He is very well as you wish him 
to be." She said, "Show me, let me look at him." They stayed beside 


144 


her till the Prophet (PBUH) came and when she saw him she said, "If 
you are safe, all other disasters will be of no importance." 


Yes, this was the best condolence for the Prophet (PBUH). He 
smiled at this unusual situation which had no similitude in loyalty 
and devotion. A poor, helpless woman lost in an hour her father, 
brother, and husband. Her reaction to that news — which if it had 
fallen on a mountain would have made it collapse was, "What 
about the Prophet of Allah?" It was such a well-timed situation that 
it is evident that Allah planned to console His Prophet (PBUH) for 
the death of Allah's Lion and martyr of all martyrs. 


145 


(12) 
~ ABD ALLAH IBN MAS‘UUD 
The First Reciter of Qur'aan 


Before the Prophet (PBUH) entered Daar Al-Arqam, Ibn 
Mas-uud had declared his belief in him. He was the sixth one to 
embrace Islam and follow the Prophet (PBUH). Thus he was one of 
the early Muslims. 


He narrated his first meeting with the Prophet (PBUH): I was a 
young shepherd boy responsible for the sheep of “Uqbah Ibn Abu 
Mu*ait. The Prophet (PBUH) once came with Abu Bakr and said, "O 
boy, do you have milk for us to drink?" and I said, "I can't let you 
drink their milk." The Prophet (PBUH) said, "Do you have a virgin 
sheep that has never mated with a male?" I said, "Yes" and brought 
it to them. The Prophet (PBUH) caught it and stroked its udder and 
prayed to Allah till the udder filled. Abu Bakr brought him a concave 
rock into which he milked the sheep. Abu Bakr drank the milk, and 
then after that the Prophet said to the udder, "Shrink," and it did. I 
went to the Prophet after this incident and said to him, "Teach me 
this kind of talk." The Prophet (PBUH) said, "You are already a 
learned boy." 


“Abd Allah Ibn Mas*uud was fascinated to see the pious 
Servant and Messenger of Allah supplicate Allah and stroke a virgin 
udder till it gave milk, pure and agreeable to those who drank it. Ibn 
Mas*uud did not realize that what he had seen was but the least 
wonderful miracle and that soon he would see at the hands of that 
honorable Prophet other miracles that would shake the world and fill 
it with light and faith. He did not realize either that he himself, the 
poor, weak, hired shepherd boy working for ‘Uqbah Ibn Abu Mu‘ait, 
would be one of those miracles when he became, through his Islam, a 
strong believer capable of defeating the pride of the Quraish and 
overcoming the oppression of its martyrs. 


146 


Before his Islam he never dared to pass by a session attended 
by any Quraish nobleman except with hastened steps and a bowed 
head, but after Islam he was capable of going to the Ka*bah, where 
the elite Quraish congregated and standing among them reading the 
Qur'aan in a loud, beautiful, impressive voice: < In the Name of 
Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful, The Most Beneficent! 
Has taught the Qur'aan. He created man. He taught him eloquent 
speech. The sun and the moon run on their fixed courses (exactly) 
calculated with measured out stages for each. And the herbs (or 
stars ) and the trees both prostrate > (55: 1-6). 


He went on reciting while the Quraish were thunderstruck, not 
believing their own eyes or ears. They could not imagine that the one 
challenging their pride was just one of their hired shepherd boys who 
was the poor unknown “Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘uud. Let us hear an 
eye witness, Az-Zubair (May Allah be pleased with him), describe 
the exciting scene: “Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘uud was the first one to recite 
Qur'aan publicly in Makkah after the Prophet (PBUH). It happened 
one day that the Prophet's Companions were gathered with the 
Prophet (PBUH). They said, "By Allah, the Quraish have never 
heard the Qur'aan being recited to them before. Isn't there any man to 
recite it so that they may hear it?” Thereupon ~Abd Allah Ibn 
Mas-uud said, "I." They said, "We are afraid they may harm you." 
We want a man with a strong family to protect him from those 
people if they want to harm him." He said, "Let me go, Allah will 
protect me." Ibn Mas‘uud went to the Maqaam at the Ka*bah and 
recited < In the Name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most 
Merciful, The Most Beneficent! Has taught the Qur'aan. ..> and he 
went on reciting. The Quraish gazed at him and said, “What does Ibn 
Umm “Abd say? He is reciting some of what Muhammad came 
with." They went to him and began to beat him in the face while he 
was reciting till he finished whatever Allah wished him to recite from 
the surah. He returned to his friends with a wounded face and 
body, and they told him, "This is what we were afraid would happen 
to you." He answered them, "Those enemies of Allah have never 
been more worthless to me than this moment, and if you wish I will go 
back to them and do the same tomorrow." They said, “No, it is 
enough for you. You have made them hear what they hated.” 


147 


Indeed, when Ibn Mas‘uud was fascinated by the sheep's udder 
which was filled with milk before its time, he did not realize that he 
and his humble friends would be one of the greater miracles of the 
Prophet (PBUH) on the day they carried the banner of Allah, with 
which they outshone the sun. He did not realize that such a day was 
very near. Soon that day came, and the poor, hired boy became a 
miracle! 


He was hardly seen in the crowd of life and not even seen away 
from that crowd because he was too humble when compared with 
those who possessed wealth, power, and social status. Financially, 
he was poor. Physically, he was feeble, and socially, he was a 
nobody. But Islam compensated him for his poverty with a large 
share of the treasures of Khosrau and Caesar. Islam also 
compensated him for his physical weakness with a strong will that 
conquered the oppressors and helped to change the whole historical 
course of events. Again, Islam compensated his humble social status 
through immortality, knowledge, and honor that gave him an eminent 
place among the most prominent of historical figures. 


The Prophet's prophecy about him which said, "You are a 
learned boy" was true. Indeed, Allah endowed him with knowledge 
till he became the most learned of this Ummah and the best one to 
know Qur'aan by heart. Ibn Mas‘uud described himself saying, "I in 
fact took from the mouth of Allah's Messenger more than seventy 
surahs of the Qur'aan. I have a better understanding of the Book of 
Allah than any one of you." 


It could be that Allah wanted to reward him for risking his life 
when he used to recite Qur'aan everywhere during the years of 
torture. So, He the Almighty endowed him with a wonderful talent 
for reciting and understanding Qur'aan to the extent that made the 
Prophet (PBUH) direct his Companions to follow his example. The 
Prophet (PBUH) said, "Stick to the method of Ibn Umm *Abd." He 
recommended that they imitate his way of reciting and learn it from 
him. The Prophet (PBUH) said, “Whoever wants to hear Qur'aan as 
fresh as it was revealed, let him hear it from Ibn Umm “Abd,” and 


148 


said, "Whoever wants to read Qur'aan as fresh as it was revealed, let 
him read it in the way Ibn Umm “Abd does." 


It was a pleasure for the Prophet (PBUH) to hear Qur'aan being 
recited from the mouth of Ibn Mas*uud. The Prophet (PBUH) once 
called on him and said, "Recite to me, “Abd Allah,” and ~Abd Allah 
said, "How can I recite to you when it was revealed to you?" The 
Prophet (PBUH) said, "I like to hear it from others." Thereupon Ibn 
Mas‘uud started reading part of Surat An-Nisaa' till he reached the 
verse: < How (will it be) then, when We bring from each nation a 
witness and We bring you as a witness against those people. On 
that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger will 
wish that they were buried in the earth, but they will never be able to 
hide a single fact from Allah > (4: 41-42). Upon hearing this, the 
Prophet's eyes flooded with tears and he waved to Ibn Mas-uud 
saying, "Enough, enough, Ibn Mas*‘uud." 


Ibn Mas‘uud himself talked proudly about Allah's bounty upon 
him. "By Allah, there is no surah in the Book of Allah about which | 
do not know where and in what context it was revealed. I have a 
better understanding of the Book of Allah than you do, and if I were 
to know that someone had a better understanding than I and I could 
reach him on the back of a mule, I would definitely go to him ona 
camel's back, but I am not better than you are." 


The Prophet's Companions witnessed this for him. The 
Commander of the Faithful “Umar Ibn Al-Kattaab said about 
him,"He was filled with knowledge." Also Abu Muusaa Al- Ash‘ariy 
said about him, "Don't ask me about any matter as long as you have 
this scholar among you." He was not only praised for his knowledge 
of Qur'aan and jurisprudence, but also for his piety and God- 
consciousness. Hudhaifah said about him, "I have never seen anyone 
more like the Prophet(PBUH) in his way of life and characteristics 
than Ibn Mas*uud.” He also said, "The lucky Companions of the 
Prophet (PBUH) realized that Ibn Umm “Abd is the nearest one of 
them to Allah." 


149 


One day a number of Companions were gathered at the house 
of ~Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib and said to him, "O Commander of the 
Faithful, we have never seen a man who is more virtuous, more 
learned, more companionable, friendly, and God-fearing than “Abd 
Allah Ibn Mas‘uud." ~Aliy said, "I beg you by Allah, is this true from 
your hearts?" They said, "Yes." ~Aliy said, "O Allah, I testify in 
front of You that I say about him like what they said and more. He 
read the Qur'aan and did what is lawful in it and avoided what is 
forbidden. He was knowledgeable in religion and scholarly in 
Sunnah." 


The Prophet's Companions said about him, "He was admitted 
to the company of the Prophet (PBUH), whereas we were detained, 
and he was present in his company, whereas we were absent.” This 
means he used to have more privileges than the others. He used to 
enter the Prophet's house and sit with him more than anybody else. 
He was the one the Prophet (PBUH) entrusted with his secrets to the 
extent that he was entitled "The Secretary.” 


Abu Muusaa Al-Ash‘ariy (May Allah be pleased with him) 
said in this context, "I came to Allah's Messenger (PBUH) and 
thought that Ibn Mas‘uud was among the members of his family." 
This means that the Prophet (PBUH) loved him dearly for his piety 
and intelligence. He said about him, "If I were to appoint a 
commander without consulting the Muslims, I would have appointed 
Ibn Umm “Abd,” and as mentioned before, the Prophet (PBUH) 
asked his Companions to "Stick to the method of Ibn Umm *Abd." 


He was so near to the Prophet (PBUH) and so trusted by him 
that he was given more privileges than anyone else was given. The 
Prophet (PBUH) told him, "My permission to you is that you may 
raise the curtains." This indicates his being allowed to knock at the 
Prophet's door at any time during the day or night. This is why the 
Companions said, "He was admitted to the company of the Prophet 
(PBUH), whereas we were detained, and he was present in his 
company, whereas we were absent." 


150 


He was really up to this standard. Although such a close 
relationship could have created some sort of intimacy, Ibn Mas‘uud's 
attitude towards the Prophet (PBUH) was always one of respect 
and politeness. This was even after the Prophet's death. Although 
he seldom mentioned the Prophet (PBUH) after his death, in most 
cases when he did mention him, he began to tremble and shake, and 
all the signs of worry and perplexity appeared on him. This occurred 
whenever his lips began to murmur, "I heard the Prophet (PBUH) say 

.." lest he should forget or change one single letter of what was 
said. 


Let us hear what his brothers in Islam said about such behavior. 
“Amr Ibn Maimuun reported, “I was frequently visited by Ibn 
Mas*uud for about a year, during which time I did not hear him speak 
about the Prophet (PBUH). But one day he was talking and he 
uttéred, "The Prophet (PBUH) said..." At this moment he was 
badly troubled and started to sweat and corrected himself, "The 
Prophet (PBUH) said something like that.” 


~Alqamah Ibn Qais reported, “Ibn Mas*uud used to speak to 
people every Thursday night. I never heard him saying, "The Prophet 
(PBUH) said," but he once said it and he was leaning on a stick that 
started to shake in his hand. 


Also, Masruuq narrated on the authority of “Abd Allah, "One 
day Ibn Mas*uud was speaking and he said, "I heard the 
Prophet (PBUH). . .". On this he and his clothes started to shake. 
Then he corrected himself, "Something like this." 


Thus the veneration of the Prophet (PBUH) in his heart was 
that great, and this was a sign of his intelligence. Such a man, who 
accompanied the Prophet (PBUH) more than anybody else, was the 
best to realize how great the Prophet (PBUH) was. Therefore, he 
maintained the same manner concerning him during his life and after 
his death. 


151 


Ibn Mas‘uud never missed the company of the Prophet (PBUH) 
either while traveling or at home. He participated in all the battles, 
and on the Day of Badr his role was significant, especially with Abu 
Jahl. The Prophet's (PBUH) caliphs, were also fully aware of his 
proper value. The Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn Al-Kattaab 
appointed him as director of the treasury (Bait Al-Maal) in Kufa and 
he said to the people there, "By Allah, there is no god but He. You 
know that I have given you a preference over myself when I sent him 
to you to learn from him." 


The people of Kufa liked him as they never liked anyone 
before him. It was a real miracle that the whole people of Kufa 
agreed on liking somebody because they were known to be a people 
of rebellion and mutiny. They hardly agreed on one kind of food, 
and they did not tolerate peace and tranquillity. Their love for him 
was so great that when the Caliph “Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased 
with him) wanted to discharge him of his office, they surrounded him 
and said, "Stay with us and don't go. We will protect you against 
anything that you don't like." But Ibn Mas‘uud gave them an answer 
that really reflected his greatness and piety. He said, "He has the 
right of obedience on me. There will be turbulence coming and I 
hate to be the first to open the door to it." 


This wonderful situation discloses to us the nature of the 
relationship between Ibn Mas*‘uud and “Uthmaan. They had an 
argument and a disagreement between them which ended with the 
caliph cutting Ibn Mas*uud's salary from the Bait Al-Maal. In return, 
Ibn Mas*uud never spoke ill of the caliph. On the contrary, he used 
to defend him. When he heard about the attempted assassinations on 
‘Uthmaan, he said his famous words, "If they kill him they will not 
find anyone like him to succeed ." Some of Ibn Mas*uud's friends 
said, "We never heard him uttering a bad word about “Uthmaan." 


Allah endowed Ibn Mas*uud with wisdom along with his piety. 
He had an insight that enabled him to see facts beyond the surface, 
and the capability to express such facts in an intelligent style. For 
example, he summarized the life of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab in one 


152 


tos 


concise sentence: " ‘Umar's Islam was an opening, his Hijrah was a 
victory, and his rule was a mercy." 


He once expressed the idea of the relativity of time saying, 
"Your Lord does not have day or night because the light of the earth 
and the skies is but from the light of His face." 


In another context he praised the value of work in raising the 
social standard of man: "I hate a man living in leisure with nothing 
to do, either for his worldly life or the life to come." The next is a 
comprehensive phrase: "The best wealth is the wealth of the soul. 
The best provision is right conduct. The most major of sins is lying, 
the most evil earning is usury, and the most evil of what can be eaten 
is eating up the property of orphans. Whoever excuses others, will be 
excused by Allah, and whoever forgives others will be forgiven by 
others." 


That was “Abd Allah Ibn Mas*uud, the Prophet's (PBUH) 
Companion, and that is but one glimpse of the heroic life he lived in 
the way of Allah, His Prophet and His religion. That was the man 
who had been as small as a bird. He was so thin and short that he 
was the same height as a sitting person. He had very thin legs. He 
once climbed a tree to pick some arak sticks for the Prophet (PBUH), 
and when the Companions saw how thin his legs were they laughed. 
The Prophet (PBUH) said, “Are you laughing at Ibn Mas*uud's legs? 
On Allah's scales of justice they are heavier than the mountain of 
Uhud." Indeed that was the poor, weak hired boy who became by 
faith an Imam (leader) guiding people to the light. 


It was Allah's bounty on him that he was counted among the 
first ten Companions of the Prophet (PBUH) who were promised to 
enter Paradise while they were still alive. He participated in all the 
victorious wars with the Prophet (PBUH) and his caliphs. He 
witnessed how the two greatest empires opened their gates in 
submission to the banners of Islam. He saw the high positions and 


153 


lucrative money pouring into the hands of the Muslims, but his mind 
was never obsessed by such matters. Instead, he was pre-occupied 
with how to fulfil the pledge he offered to the Prophet (PBUH), and 
he was also never tempted to give up the life of humbleness and self- 
denial that he used to lead. He had only one wish that he dreamed 
all his life might come true. 


Let us hear him speaking about it: While I was with the 
Prophet (PBUH) at the Battle of Tabuuk, I woke up at midnight to 
see a flame of fire near the place of the army. I followed it and found 
the Prophet (PBUH), Abu Bakr and “Umar digging a grave to bury 
*Abd Allah Dhul Bijaadain Al-Muzaniy who died at the time. The 
Prophet (PBUH) was in the grave and asked Abu Bakr and “Umar, 
“hand your brother to me," and they did. After he put his body in the 
grave he said, "O Allah, in this night I am fully satisfied and pleased 
with him. So be You pleased with him." I wished I was the one being 
buried in that hole. 


This was his sole wish in his life. It was not related to what 
people were racing at in this life, such as wealth, social status or 
glory. It was the wish of a man who possessed a kind heart, a noble 
soul, and a strong faith. Such a man was guided by Allah, educated 
by the Prophet (PBUH), and enlightened by Qur'aan. 


(13) 
HUDHAIFAH IBN AL-YAMMAAN 
The Enemy of Hypocrisy, The Friend of Frankness 


The people of Madaa'in came out in great numbers to welcome 
their new governor chosen by their Caliph “Umar (May Allah be 
pleased with him). They came out preceded by their interest in that 
graceful Companion. They had heard much about his good conduct, 
his piety, and more so about his great achievement in the conquest of 
Iraq. 


While they were waiting for the coming procession, they saw 
before them a bright fellow riding on a donkey with an old saddle. 
The man was riding with his legs hanging and holding a loaf of bread 
and some salt in his hands, and eating and chewing his food. When 
he came in the midst of the people and they discovered he was 
Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yammaan, the expected governor, they were about 
to lose their wits! But why the surprise? Who did they expect the 
choice of “Umar would be ? In fact, they were not to blame. Their 
countries had not been accustomed since Persian days or even before 
to having rulers of with such graceful style. 


* * * 


Hudhaifah was surrounded and welcomed by numerous 
people. When he saw that they were gazing at him as if expecting a 
speech, he looked at them closely and said, "Beware of sedition!" 
They asked, "What is sedition, Abu “Abd Allah?” "The gates of 
rulers," he said. "When one of you is admitted to the presence of the 
ruler or governor and falsely agrees with what he says and commends 
him for what he has not done." 


It was a wonderful start, as much as it was surprising. People 
at once remembered what they had heard about their new governor 
and that he did not detest anything in the whole world as much as 
he detested and scorned hypocrisy. Such a beginning was the 


155 


truest expression concerning the character of the new governor and 
his way of ruling and governing. 


* * * 


As a matter of fact, Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yammaan was a man 
who came to life equipped with a unique characteristic in detesting 
hypocrisy and in having the remarkable capability to detect it in its 
distant, concealed places. He and his brother Safwaan came to the 
Prophet (PBUH) accompanied by their father and all embraced 
Islam. He added more sharpness and polish to his inborn qualities 
from the time he embraced a powerful, clean, brave, and 
straightforward religion which scorns cowardice, hypocrisy, and. lies. 


Moreover, he learned his manners at the hands of the Messenger 
(PBUH) who was as clear as the glorious morning light. Nothing was 
hidden in his life nor in his inner self. He was truthful and 
trustworthy. He liked the strong in righteousness and detested those 
who were not straightforward, i.e. the hypocrites and deceivers. 
Therefore, there was no realm where his talent could bloom and 
blossom more than it did under the guidance of faith at the hands of 
the Messenger and among that generation of his great Companions. 


Verily, his talent grew and developed, and he specialized in 
reading faces and probing into the inner selves. At a glance he could 
easily read faces and know the secret of the hidden depths and 
concealed inner mysteries. He attained what he wanted in that realm 
to the extent that the inspired, intelligent, and resourceful Caliph 
~Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) used to ask Hudhaifah's 
opinion and insight in selecting and knowing men. 


Hudhaifah possessed the discretion that made him realize that 
what is good in this world is obvious to whoever seeks it, and that 
evil is the thing that is disguised and hidden. Therefore, the 
intelligent person should be discreet in studying evil in its hidden and 
apparent forms. 


156 


Hudhaifah (May Allah be pleased with him) therefore devoted 
his time to the study of evil and evil doers, as well as hypocrisy and 
hypocrites. He reported: People used to ask Allah's Prophet (PBUH) 
about good, but I used to ask him about evil, for fear that it should 
overtake me. I said, "O Messenger of Allah, we were in ignorant and 
evil times, then Allah presented us with this good. Will there be evil 
after this good?" He said, "Yes." I said, "And after this evil, will there 
be good?" He said, "Yes but it would be tainted with evil (literally, 
smoke)." I asked, "What will this evil be?" He said, "There will be 
some people who will lead (people) according to principles other 
than my tradition. You will see their actions and disapprove of 
them." I said, "Will there be any evil after that good?" —_He said, 
"Yes, there will be some people who will invite others to the doors of 
Hell, and whoever accepts their invitation to it will be thrown in it 
(by them)." I said, "O Messenger of Allah! Describe those people to 
us." He said, "They will belong to us and speak our language." I 
asked, "What do you order me to do if such a thing should take place 
in my life?" He said, "Adhere to the group of Muslims and their 
chief." I asked, "If there is neither a group (of Muslims) nor a chief, 
what shall I do?" He said, "Keep away from all those different sects, 
even if you have to eat the roots of a tree, till you meet Allah while 
you are still in that state.” 


Note his statement, "People used to ask Allah's Prophet 
(PBUH) about good, but I used to ask him about evil, for fear that it 
should overtake me." Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yammaan lived open- eyed 
and insightful with regards to temptations and the paths of evil so 
that he might avoid them and warn people of them. This gave him 
insight of the world, experience with people, and knowledge of the 
times. He would contemplate matters in his mind as a philosopher 
would and with the sound judgment of a wise man. 


He said (May Allah be pleased with him): " Almighty Allah 
sent Muhammad (PBUH) to call people from misguidance to the right 
path, and from disbelief to belief in Allah. Some responded to his 
call, following the right way. Those who were dead were raised to 
life and those who were alive died because of their evil doing. When 


157 


the period of prophethood was over, caliphates followed the same 
methods. Then there appeared a detested monarchy. There were 
people who disavowed with their hearts, hands, and tongues, and 
who responded to the path of justice. There were those who 
disavowed with their hearts and tongues but abstained from using 
their hands. Thus they left out an area of justice. There were also 
those who disavowed with their hearts, abstaining to use their hands 
or tongues. Thus they left out two areas of justice. There were those 
who did not disavow, neither with their hearts, nor with their hands 
or tongues, and those were the dead in life! 


He talked about hearts and a life of guidance or misguidance 
according to the heart. He said: There are four kinds of hearts: a 
locked heart, which is the heart of the disbeliever; a duplicitous heart, 
which is the heart of the hypocrite; a pure heart full of light, which is 
the heart of the believer; and a heart filled with hypocrisy and faith. 
Its faith is like a tree supplied with good water, but like hypocrisy 
because it is like an ulcer filled with pus and blood. Whichever is 
made will win. 


Hudhaifah's experience of evil and his persistence in resisting 
and challenging it sharpened his tongue and words. He himself 
informed us about this in a noble hadith: I approached the Prophet 
(PBUH) and said, "O Messenger of Allah, I have an abusing tongue 
towards my people, and I am afraid it might lead me to the fire of 
Hell." The Prophet (PBUH) said to me, "Do you ask Allah's 
forgiveness? I repent to Allah a hundred times a day." 


That was Hudhaifah, the enemy of hyprocrisy and the friend of 
frankness. For a man of this character, his faith had to be strong and 
his loyalty intense. That was Hudhaifah's way, in respect to faith 
and loyalty. He witnessed his father die as a Muslim in the battle of 
Uhud, killed in error by Muslim hands, mistaking him for one of the 
unbelievers. 


Hudhaifah was looking around when by chance he saw the 
swords hitting him, so he called to his attackers, "My father! My 


father! He's my father!" But it was too late. When the Muslims heard 
about this incident they were grieved, but Hudhaifah looked at them 
with mercy and forgiveness and said, "May Allah forgive you. He is 
the Most Merciful." He then went forward with his sword towards 
the raging battle, doing his best and performing his duty. 


When the battle ended and the Prophet (PBUH) heard the 
news, he ordered that blood money be paid for the death of 
Hudhaifah's father, Husail Ibn Jaabir (May Allah be pleased with 
him). Hudhaifah refused to take the money and gave it as alms to 
the Muslims, an act which made the Prophet (PBUH) love and 
appreciate him even more. 


* * * 


Hudhaifah's faith and loyalty refused to acknowledge inability 
and weakness, or even the impossible. In the Battle of Al-Khandaq 
and after the failure of the unbelievers of the Quraish and their Jewish 
allies, the Prophet (PBUH) wanted to know the latest developments 
in the enemy camp. 


The night was black and terrifying, and a storm was raging as if 
it wanted to uproot the solid mountains of the desert. The whole 
situation — which included a siege, stubbornness and perserverance — 
- brought about fear and anxiety. In addition, hunger had reached a 
high level among the Companions of the Prophet. Therefore, who 
would have the strength to go amidst the dark dangers of the enemy 
camp and penetrate it to gather intelligence and news? 


The Messenger (PBUH) was the one who selected him from 
among his Companions as the one to perform such a difficult task. 
Who was that hero? It was Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yammaan. The 
Prophet (PBUH) asked him and he obeyed. 


He admitted with great candor in relating the incident that he 
had no choice but to obey, thus implying that he feared the mission 
being assigned to him. He was afraid of its consequences. His fear 


was due to performing this mission under the pinch of hunger, cold 
weather, and extreme exhaustion that resulted from the siege by the 
disbelievers that had lasted a month or more. 


What happened to Hudhaifah that night was amazing. He 
covered the distance between the two armies and penetrated the 
surrounding enemy camp of the Quraish. A violent wind had put out 
the camp's fires, so the place was enveloped in darkness. Hudhaifah 
took his place amidst the lines of the fighters. The leader of the 
Quraish, Abu Sufyaan, was afraid that darkness might surprise them 
with scouts from the Muslim camp. He stood to warn his army, and 
Hudhaifah heard his loud voice saying, "O people of the Quraish, 
each one of you should know who is sitting next to him and should 
know his name." Hudhaifah reports, "I hastened to the hand of the 
man next to me, and said to him, ‘Who are you?’ He said, ‘Such and 
such a person!’ " 


He therefore secured his being with the army in peace! Abu 
Sufyaan resumed his talk to the army, saying, "O people of the 
Quraish, by Allah, you are not in a place to settle. The horses and 
the camels are exhausted. The tribe of Bani Quraidah has reneged on 
us and we learned about them what we hate, and we suffer from the 
violent wind as you see. No food can be cooked, no fire can blaze for 
us, and no structure can hold. You have to leave, for I am leaving." 
He then mounted his camel and started moving, followed by the 
fighters. 


Hudhaifah said, "But for the promise I gave Allah's Messenger 
(PBUH), who asked me not to do anything until I returned to him, I 
would have killed him with an arrow." Hudhaifah then returned to 
the Messenger (PBUH) and gave him the information and happy 
news. 


Whoever saw Hudhaifah and considered his way of thinking, 
his philosophy, and his devotion to knowledge could hardly expect 


160 


any heroism from him in the battlefield. Nevertheless, Hudhaifah 
contradicted all expectations. 


The man who used to worship Allah in solitude, the 
contemplative one, no sooner did he carry his sword and meet the 
ignorant pagan army than he disclosed a genius that caught the eyes. 
Suffice it to know that he was one of only three or five who had the 
great privilege of invading all the cities of Iraq. In Hamdaan, Ar-Raiy 
Ad-Dainawar, the conquest was accomplished through him. 


In the great Battle of Nahaawand, in which the Persians 
gathered about 150,000 fighters, Caliph ‘Umar, the Commander of 
the Faithful, chose for the leadership of the Muslim armies An- 
Nu*maan Ibn Mugrin, then wrote to Hudhaifah to march to him 
leading an army from Kufa. 


“Umar sent his letter to the fighters, saying, "When the Muslims 
gather, let every commander lead his army, and let An- Nu*maan Ibn 
Mugrin be the commander-in-chief of all the armies. If An-Nu*maan 
is martyred, let Hudhaifah be the leader. If he is martyred, let Jarir 
Ibn “Abd Allah lead them." 


In this way, the Commander of the Faithful went on choosing 
the leaders of the battle till he named seven of them. Then the two 
armies met. 


The Persians were 150,000, while the Muslims were only 
30,000. A battle which exceeded all others commenced. It was the 
fiercest in history, in terms of violence and heroism. The leader of 
the Muslim army, An-Nu*maan Ibn Mugrin fell in the battle and was 
martyred, but before the standard of the Muslims fell to the ground, 
the new leader caught it with his right hand, and with it he led the 
wind of victory with vigor and great herosim. This leader was none 
but Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yammaan. 


At once he held the standard and chose not to announce the 
news of the death of An-Nu‘maan until the battle was over. He 


161 


called Na‘iim Ibn Mugrin to be in the place of his brother to honor 
him. 


How he achieved all this in no time, in the heart of the great 
battle, was through his bright intuition. Then he turned like a violent 
tempest wind towards the Persian lines shouting, "Allahu akbar! 
Allah is the greatest! His Promise is fulfilled! Allahu akbar! He led 
His soldiers to victory!" Then he turned the head of his horse 
towards the fighters of his army and called, "O you followers of 
Muhammad (PBUH), here are Allah's Gardens ready to receive you, 
do not let them wait long. Come on, men of the Battle of Badr ! 
Proceed, O you heroes of the Battle of Al-Khandaq, Uhud, and 
Tabuuk!" 


Hudhaifah kept all the enthusiasm and interest of the battle, if 
not more. The fighting ended in overwhelming defeat for the Persians, 
an unmatched defeat! 


That was his genius in wisdom when he remained in his rooms 
and genius in fighting when he stood on the battlefield. He was also 
a genius in each mission assigned to him and each advice asked of 
him. 


When Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqaas and the Muslims with him moved 
from Madaa’'in to Kufa and settled there after the great harm that 
had afflicted the Muslim Arabs due to Madaa'in's climate, ‘Umar 
wrote to Sa‘d to leave at once after the most suitable sites for 
Muslims to resettle were found. Who was deputed, to choose the site 
and the place? It was Hudhaifah Ibn Al Yammaan, accompanied by 
Salmaan Ibn Ziyaad who sought a suitable place for Muslims. 


When they reached the land of Kufa, it was a barren, sandy 
land, full of pebbles, but Hudhaifah smelled the breezes of healing 
and health. He said to his companion, "This place, Allah willing." 
That was how Kufa was planned, and the hands of construction 


162 


turned it into an inhabited city. As soon as the Muslims emigrated 
there, their sick were cured, their weak became strong, and their veins 
were filled with the pulse of health. 


Hudhaifah was very intelligent and had various experiences. 
He always used to say to the Muslims, "Your best are not those 
who neglect this world for the last, nor those who neglect the last for 
this world. The best are those who take from this and that." 


* + * 


One day in the year A.H. 36, he was called to meet his Lord. 
While he was getting ready for the last journey, some of his 
companions came to see him. He asked them, "Have you brought a 
shroud with you?" They said, "Yes." He said, "Show it to me.” When 
he saw it, he found it was new and too long. One last sarcastic grin 
was drawn on his lips, and he said, "This is not a shroud for me. 
Two white wraps without a shirt are sufficient for me. I will not be 
left in the grave for a long time, but will be offered a better place or a 
worse one!” 


He then murmured a few words which, when they listened to 
them, they discerned the following: "Welcome O death! A dear thing 
coming after longing. The one who repents now prospers not." 


One of the best human souls was raised to Allah, one the most 
pious, illuminating, and humble spirits. 


163 


(14) 
“AMMAAR IBN YAASIR 
A Man of Paradise ! 


If there were people born in Paradise, reared and brought to 
maturity there, and then brought to earth to adorn and enlighten 
it, then ‘Ammaar, his mother Sumaiyah and his father Yaasir 
would be of them! 


But why do we say "if" and why do we make that condition 
when Yaasir's family were really of Paradise? Allah's Messenger 
(PBUH) was not merely pacifying them when he said, "Patience, O 
Yaasir's family. Verily, your meeting place will be in Paradise." He 
was declaring a fact which he knew and reiterating an actuality 
perceived by him. 


“Ammaar's father, Yaasir Ibn ‘Aamir, left his native place in 
Yemen seeking a brother of his. In Makkah he found an appealing 
place, so he settled there and was in alliance with Abu Hudhaifah Ibn 
Al-Mughirah, who married him to one of his slave women, Sumaiyah 
Bint Khaiyaat. Out of this blessed marriage Allah granted the parents 
ason, “Ammaar. Their embracing of Islam was early, like that of the 
righteous ones guided by Allah. And like the early righteous Muslims 
as well, they had their good share of the Quraish's persecution and 
terror. 


The Quraish used to waylay the believers to attack them. If the 
believers were among the honorable and noble people in their 
community, the Quraish would pursue them with threats and menace. 
Abu Jahl would meet one of the believers and tell him, " You 
abandoned your forefathers’ religion and they were better than you. 
We will spoil your character, degrade your honor, reduce your 
trade, and exhaust your money." They would then launch a heated 
war of nerves upon him. 


164 


If the believers were among the weak, poor, or slaves of 
Makkah, then the Quraish would burn them with the fire of 


persecution. 


Yaasir's family belonged to that class. The order for their 
persecution was handed to Bani Makhzuum. They used to take them 
all — Yaasir, Sumaiyah and “Ammaar — to the burning desert of 
Makkah, where they would pour upon them different kinds of the hell 
of torture. 


Sumaiyah's share of that torment was colossal and terrible. We 
shall not elaborate about her now, since we shall have — Allah willing 
— another encounter with her and her likes during those immortal 
days to talk about the grace of sacrifice and the glory of her firmness. 
Suffice it to mention now, without any exaggeration, that Sumaiyah, 
the martyred one, maintained a firm stance that day which gives the 
whole of humanity an everlasting honor and an ever glorious dignity. 
Her stance made of her a great mother to believers in all ages, and to 
the honorable people of all times. 


* * * 


The Messenger (PBUH) used to go where he knew Yaasir's 
family were tortured. He did not have at that time any means of 
resistance or keeping harm from them. This was Allah's will, because 
the new faith — the faith of Ibraahiim Al-Haniifan (Abraham the 
true) — which was revealed to Muhammad was not a casual and 
passing reform movement. It was a way of life for the whole 
humanity of believers who had to inherit along with the religion all its 
history of heroism, sacrifices, and risks. These abundant noble 
sacrifices are the cement and the foundation that grant an everlasting 
firmness and immortality to the faith and the creed. It is the 
fragrance that fills the hearts of believers with loyalty, joy, and 
happiness. It is the lighthouse that guides the coming generations to 
the reality of religion, to its truth and greatness. 


Therefore, Islam had to make its sacrifices and have its victims, 
the meaning of which is illustrated and illuminated in more than one 
verse of the Qur'aan for the Muslims. Allah says: <Do the people 
think that they will be left to say: “We believe”, and they shall not 
be tried? > (29 : 2). 


<Do you think that you will enter Paradise before Allah tests 
those of you who fought (in His Cause) and (also) tests those who 
remained patient? > (3: 142). 


<And we indeed tested those who were before them. And Allah 
will certainly make (it) known (the truth of) those who are true, and 
will certainly make (it) known (the falsehood of) those who are 
liars, (although Allah knows all that before putting them to test) > 
(29 : 3). 


<Do you think you shall be left alone while Allah has not yet 
tested those among you who have striven hard...> (9 : 16). 


<Allah will not leave the believers in the state in which you 
are now, until He distinguishes the wicked from the good.> (3: 
179). 


<And what you suffered (of the disaster) on the day (of the 
Battle of Uhud when) the two armies met, was by the leave of Allah, 
in order that He might test the believers > (3 : 166). 


* * * 


That is true. This was the way the Qur'aan taught its bearers 
and descendants that sacrifice is the essence of faith and that 
resistance of unjust, oppressive challenges is through firmness, 
patience, and persistence, which form the best and the most superb 
virtues of faith. 


Therefore, this religion of Allah, when it was laying down its 
foundation, establishing its principles, and giving its models and 


166 


examples, had to support and purify itself with sacrifice. In carrying 
out this great mission, a number of its disciples, supporters, and 
righteous people were chosen to be lofty models and elevated 
examples for the coming believers. 


Sumaiyah, Yaasir and “Ammaar were of this great and blessed 
group, chosen by Islam's destiny to make of their sacrifices, firmness, 
and persistence a document of Islam's greatness and immortality. 


* * * 


We said that Allah's Messenger (PBUH) used to go out every 
day to Yaasir's family, commending their fortitude and heroism. His 
big heart was melting out of mercy and kindness to see them so 
severely tortured. One day while he was looking for them, ~Ammaar 
called to him, "O Messenger of Allah, we are suffering from extreme 
torment." The Messenger called to him saying, "Patience, Abu 
Yaqdhaan, patience O Yaasir's family. Verily, your meeting place 
will be in Paradise." 


“Ammaar's companions described the torture that was inflicted 
upon him in many of their reports. “Amr Ibn Al-Hakam, for instance, 
said, ""Ammaar used to be tortured so much that he would not be 
aware of what he was saying." “Amr Ibn Maimuun said, "The 
polytheists scorched “Ammaar Ibn Yaasir with fire, and Allah's 
Messenger (PBUH) used to pass by him, pass his hand over Yaasir's 
head and say, "O fire, be cool and peaceful on ~Ammaar, as you 
were cool and peaceful on Ibraahiim.” 


Despite that overwhelming terror, it did not vanquish 
“Ammaar's spirit, though it overburdened his back and strained his 


strength. 


“Ammaar did not feel utterly ruined except on that day when 
his executioners employed all their devilry in crime and injustice. 
They burned his skin with fire, laid him on the heated sands of the 
desert under the burning stones, ducked him in water until he could 


167 


hardly breathe and until his wounds and gashes were skinned. On 
that day, when he fell unconscious under the effect of that horror, 
they said to him, “Say something good about our gods." They kept 
saying things which he repeated without being conscious of what he 
was saying. 


When he became slightly conscious after he had fainted due to 
their torture, he remembered what he had said and was mad about it. 
This slip became so concrete to him that he saw it as an unforgivable 
sin which could not be atoned for. In a few moments his feeling of 
guilt made him suffer so much that the torture of the polytheists 
seemed to hima blessing and a balm. 


If he had been left to such feelings for a few hours, they would 
have destroyed him. He was enduring the dreadful anguish of the 
body because his spirit was lofty, but now when he thought defeat 
had reached his spirit, he was overburdened with worries and fear of 
death and destruction. But Almighty Allah willed that the final, 
exciting scene would come to its dignified end. An angel stretched 
out its blessed right hand, shook the hand of ~Ammaar and called to 
him, "Get up, O hero! There is no blame or embarrassment for you." 


When Allah's Messenger (PBUH) met him, he found him crying. 
He kept wiping his tears and telling ~Ammaar, "The polytheists took 
you, ducked your head in water, and you said such and such a 
thing?" ~Ammaar answered him, still crying, "Yes, O Messenger of 
Allah.” Allah's Messenger (PBUH) said then while smiling, "If they 
repeat it, say the same thing." Then he recited the glorious Qur'aanic 
verse: <... except him who is forced thereto and whose heart is at 
rest with Faith ...> (16: 106) 


*Ammaar's tranquility was restored, he no longer felt pain 
when they punished him, and he no longer cared about it. His spirit 
conquered and his faith conquered. The Qur'aan had included this 
blessed transaction, so whatever happened, happened. 


168 


Ammaar remained steadfast until his tormenters were 
exhausted and they retreated, yielding to his determination. 


+ * * 


The Muslims settled in Al-Madiinah after the Hijrah of their 
Messenger (PBUH). The Islamic community there began to take 
shape very fast and complete itself. Within that group of believers, 
“Ammaar was allocated a dignified position. Allah's Messenger 
loved him greatly and used to boast among his Companions about 
“Ammaar's faith and guidance. He said about him, "Verily, “Ammaar 
is filled to the bones with faith.” 


When a slight misunderstanding happened between Khaalid Ibn 
Al-Waliid and ~“Ammaar, the Messenger (PBUH) said, "Whoever 
antagonizes ~Ammaar is antagonized by Allah, and whoever detests 
“Ammaar is detested by Allah." Thereupon, Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid, 
Islam's hero, had to hasten to ~Ammaar, apologizing to him and 
hoping for his sincere forgiveness. 


When the Messenger (PBUH) and his Companions were 
building the mosque in Al-Madiinah, after their arrival there, 
Imam *Aliy (May Allah glorify his face) composed a song and kept 
on repeating it with other Muslims, saying: 


He who frequents the mosques, 
Remaining there standing and sitting, 
Is not equal to the one who keeps away from dust. 


“Ammaar was working at the side of the mosque, so he kept 
repeating the song, raising his voice. One of his companions thought 
that ~“Ammaar was disparaging him. He therefore said some angry 
words, which angered the Messenger of Allah, and he said, “What is 
their business with *Ammaar? He calls them to Heaven and they call 
him to Hell. To me, *Ammaar is but a skin between my eyes and my 
nose." 


When the Messenger of Allah loves a man _ that much, this 
man's faith, his accomplishment, his loyalty, his grace, his conscience, 
and manner have reached the top and ended at the pinnacle of 
allowed perfection. 


That was ~Ammaar. Allah had granted him abundant blessings 
and guidance. In the level of guidance and certitude, he reached a 
great height which made the Messenger (PBUH) commend his faith 
and raise him among the Companions as a model and an example, 
saying, "Take the examples of the two succeeding me, Abu Bakr and 
‘Umar, and follow the guidance of '‘‘Ammaar." The narraters 
described him, saying, “He was tall, with bluish-black eyes, broad- 
shouldered, among the most silent of the people and the least 
talkative." 


How did the life of that giant proceed, the silent, bluish-black- 
eyed, broad-shouldered man whose body bore the scars of the 
horrible torture and, at the same tim, the document of his amazing 
steadfastness and his extraordinary greatness? How did the life of 
that loyal disciple, the true believer, the overawing sacrificer proceed? 


He witnessed with his tutor and messenger all the battles: Badr, 
Uhud, Al-Khandag and Tabuuk and others. When the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) passed away, the outstanding Companion continued 
his march. At the meeting of Muslims with Persians, with Romans, 
and, before that, at their meeting with the army of apostates, 
~Ammaar was always there in the first line, an honest, brave soldier 
who did not miss an opportunity. 


He was a pious believer. No desire would take him away from 
Allah. When the Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab 
chose governors for the Muslims meticulously and with reservation, 
his eyes usually fell on “Ammaar Ibn Yaasir in complete trust. That 
was how he hastened to him and made him the governor of Kufa, and 
made Ibn Mas‘uud in charge with him of its treasury (Bait Al-Maal). 
He then wrote to the people of Kufa heralding the new governor and 
said, "I send you*Ammaar Ibn Yaasir as a governor, and Ibn 


170 


Mas“uud as a teacher and a minister. They are of the distinguished 
people of Muhammad's Companions, and of the people of Badr." 


During his rule, “Ammaar followed a way which was hard for 
worldly people to endure so that they turned against him, or were 
about to. His rule made him more modest, more pious, and more 
ascetic. 


One of his contemporaries in Kufa, Ibn Abi Hudhail said about 
him, "| saw ~Ammaar Ibn Yaasir when he was the governer of Kufa 
buying some vegetables. He tied them with a rope and carried them 
on his shoulders and went home." 


One of the public said to him when he was the governor of 
Kufa, "O you whose ear is cut off." He was scorning him because of 
his ear which had been cut off by the swords of the apostates during 
the Yamaamah War. The governor, in whose hands was the power of 
rule, merely said to his insulter, "You insulted the best part of my ear. 
It was injured in the cause of Allah." 


It is true. It was injured in the cause of Allah on the Day of 
Yamaamah, which was one of ~“Ammaar's glorious days. This giant 
set out in stormy courage to annihilate the soldiers in the army of 
Musailamah the Liar, offering death and destruction. When he 
perceived a lack of enthusiasm among the Muslims, he sent his 
quaking shouts which pushed them as shot arrows. 


Abd Allah Ibn “Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) 
reported: I saw “Ammaar Ibn Yaasir on the Day of Yamaamah on a 
rock shouting, "O you Muslim people, are you running away from 
Paradise? I am ~Ammaar Ibn Yaasir, come to me." When I looked at 
him, I found his ear cut off and swinging while he was fighting 
fiercely. 


If there is anyone who has his doubts concerning Muhammad 
(PBUH), the truthful Messenger and the perfect teacher, let him halt 
in front of these examples of his disciples and Companions and ask 


171 


himself, "Is it possible for anyone to produce that refined style except 
a noble messenger and a great teacher?" If they were involved in a 
fight for Allah's cause, they hastened as if they were looking for 
death, not only for victory. If they were caliphs and rulers, the 
caliph went himself to milk the orphans’ sheep and make their bread, 
as Abu Bakr and ‘Umar did. If they were governors, they carried 
their food on their backs, tied with a rope, as “Ammaar did, or gave 
up their pay and set to making baskets and vessels out of plaited 
palm leaves, as Salmaan did . Should we not bow in salutation and 
respect to the faith that produced them and to the Messenger who 
raised them, and before all that to Almighty Allah Who chose them 
for that, guided them to it, and made them pioneers to the best nation 
of people on earth? 


Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yammaan, the expert in the inner language, 
the language of the heart, was preparing to meet Allah and suffering 
from the agony of death when his companions surrounding him 
asked, "To whom should we go, if people differ?" Hudhaifah 
answered in his last words, "You should turn to Ibn Sumaiyah 
because he will not part from truth until death.” 


Yes, “Ammaar would turn with the truth wherever it went. 
Now while we trace his blessed direction and follow the landmarks 
of his great life, let us approach a momentous scene. But before 
watching that grand and graceful scene in its glory and perfection, in 
its sincerity and persistence, let us watch another scene preceding, 
foreshadowing, and preparing for it. 


That scene was following the Muslims’ settlement in Al- 
Madiinah. The honest Messenger (PBUH) rose, surrounded by his 
righteous Companions, with unkempt hair and full of dust. They 
were establishing Allah's house and building His mosque. Their 
faithful hearts were filled with joy, glowed with delight, and 
murmured their thanks to Allah. 


172 


All were working in happiness and hope, carrying stone, mixing 
mortar, and erecting the building. There was a team here, another 
team over there. The happy horizon echoed the singing with which 
they raised with overjoyed voices: "If we stayed while the Prophet 
worked, it would be misguided work of ours." They sang in that 
manner, then their voices were raised in another song: “O Allah, 
living is but in the next world, then have mercy on the Ansaar 
and the Muhaajiruun!" Then a third song was raised: 


He who frequents the mosques, 
Remaining there standing and sitting, 
Is not equal to the one who keeps away from dust. 


They were cells working, Allah's soldiers, carrying His banner 
and erecting His building. The honest and kind Messenger was with 
them, carrying the heaviest of the stones and performing the hardest 
work. Their singing voices reflected the delight of their satisfied 
souls. Heaven above them filled the earth that bore them with 
delight, and bright life was witnessing its best celebrations. 


“Ammaar Ibn Yaasir was there amidst the celebration, carrying 
the heavy stones from their quarries to their positions. When the 
guided mercy, Muhammad the Messenger of Allah saw him, he 
sympathized greatly with him. He approached him and removed the 
dust from his head with his kind hand. With looks filled with the 
light of Allah, he contemplated his innocent, faithful face and said in 
front of all the Companions. "Alas for Ibn Sumaiyah, killed by the 
tyrant group." 


The foretelling was repeated once again when a wall ~Ammaar 
was working beneath fell, and some brethren believed he was dead. 
They went to offer condolences to the Messenger (PBUH), and the 
Companions were shocked by the news, but the Messenger (PBUH) 
said reassuringly and confidently, "*Ammaar is not dead. The tyrant 
party will kill *Ammaar." 


Who was this party? And where? When? 


173 


*Ammaar listened to the prophecy in a way that showed he 
knew the great Messenger's truth of perception. Yet, he was not 
horrified. Since becoming a Muslim he had been expecting death and 
martyrdom every moment of the day and night. 


Days and years passed. The Messenger (PBUH) went to the 
Supreme Companion, followed by Abu Bakr and then‘Umar (May 
Allah be pleased with them). ~“Uthmaan Ibn ~Affaan, "The Man of 
Two Lights", became caliph. Conspiracies against Islam were doing 
their best, trying to gain by treachery and sedition what they lost in 
war. “Umar's death was the first success achieved by these 
conspiracies blowing on Al-Madiinah as a breeze of poison from 
those countries whose sovereignty and thrones Islam had destroyed. 
They were tempted by ‘Umar's martyrdom to continue their efforts, 
so they followed and awakened seditions in most Islamic countries. 


In addition, ‘Uthmaan might not have given the matter the 
attention, care, and response it deserved, so the incident happened 
and “Uthmaan was martyred and the doors of seditions were opened 
on the Muslims. Mu*aawiyah started fighting the new caliph, ~Aliy 
(May Allah glorify his face) for his right in the matter and for the 
caliphate. The Companions had different stances. Some of them 
washed their hands of the whole matter and went home, making Ibn 
“Umar's words their motto : 


To the one who says, "Come to prayer," I will respond. 

To the one who says, "Come to success,” | will respond. 

But to the one who says, "Come to kill your Muslim 
brother and to take his money," I will say, "No." 


Some Muslims were partial to Mu‘aawiyah, others were partial 
to ‘Aliy, the one who demanded the pledge of allegiance to him as the 
Muslims' caliph. Where do you think ~“Ammaar would stand? Where 
should he stand, the man about whom the Messenger of Allah said, 
"Follow the guidance of “Ammaar," and, "Whoever antagonizes 
~Ammaar, will be antagonized by Allah"? 


174 


The man who, if he approached the house of Allah's Messenger 
(PBUH), the latter would say, "Welcome the good-scented, kind man, 
allow him to come in"? 


He stood by “Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib, not as a prejudiced, biased 
person, but as one complying with the truth and keeping his promise. 
*Aliy was the Caliph of the Muslims and had the pledge of allegiance 
to be its leader (Imam). He took the caliphate and he was worthy of 
it. Above all, “Aliy had the qualities that made his place to the 
Messenger of Allah as that of Haaruun (Aaron) to Muusaa (Moses). 


~Ammaar, who always turned towards the truth wherever it 
was to enlighten his insight and loyalty to the possessor of truth in 
that fight, turned to ~Aliy on that day and stood by him. ~Aliy (May 
Allah be pleased with him) was overjoyed with “Ammaar's pledge 
and trusted that he was right in his demand because the great man of 
truth, ~Ammaar Ibn Yaasir, approached and went with him. 


The terrible Day of Siffiin arrived. Imam “Alii came out to face 
the serious rebellion which he felt he had to curb. ~Ammaar came out 
with him, and he was 93 years old then. Imagine, a man of 93 going to 
- fight! It is true, as long as he believed that fighting was his 
responsibility and duty. In fact, he fought more strongly and better 
than a man of 30. He was the man who was constantly silent, who 
spoke little. When he moved his lips, he moved them to supplicate, 
"I seek Allah's protection from sedition. I seek Allah's protection from 
sedition." 


And after the passing away of the Messenger of Allah, these 
words remained his constant supplication. As days passed, he used 
to seek Allah's protection more, as if his pure heart felt the coming 
danger as the days went on. When it did happen and the sedition 
occurred, Ibn Sumaiyah knew his place, so he stood in Siffiin 
carrying his sword, a man of 93 to support a right which he believed 
should be supported. 


175 


He declared his opinion about that fighting: O people, let us be 
directed to the people who claim they are avenging-Uthmaan. By 
Allah, their intention is not revenge, but they have tasted worldly 
things and are pleased with them. They know that truth keeps them 
away from what they enjoy of lust and their world. Those people 
had no precedent in the past to keep Muslims in obedience to them 
or in their support. Their hearts have not felt awe towards Allah to 
force them to follow the truth. They deceive the people by claiming 
they are avenging “Uthmaan’s death. They seek nothing but to be 
tyrants and kings." 


He then took the standard in his hand, raised jt high and 
fluttering above their heads and shouted, "By Allah in Whose hands 
my soul lies, ] fought with this standard with the Messenger of Allah, 
and here I am fighting with it today. By Allah, if they defeat us until 
they reach the palm trees of Hajar, I would still believe we are in the 
right and they are following the wrong.” People followed ~Ammaar 
and trusted his words. 


‘Abu “Abd Ar-Rahman As-Sulamiy reported: " We witnessed 
with ~Aliy (May Allah be pleased with him) the Battle of Siffiin, and 
I saw ~Ammaar (May Allah be pleased with him) not taking one turn 
nor one of its valleys but the Companions of Muhammad (PBUH) 
would follow him as if he were their standard!" 


When *Ammaar was engaged in the battle he knew he was one 
of its martyrs. The Messenger's prophecy was illuminated in big 
letters in front of his eyes, "The tyrant party will kill ~“Ammaar." For 
that reason his voice was ringing over the horizon of the battle with 
the following tune, “Today, I meet the dear ones, Muhammad and 
his Companions." He would then rush like a high arrow towards 
Mu‘aawiyah's position and surround him, singing loudly : 


We hit you at its first revelation, 

Now we hit you again for its interpretation; 

A hitting that removes respect from one's eyes, 
And distracts the lover from his lass, 

Or restores the right to its own place. 


176 


He meant by this that the former Companions of the Messenger 
(PBUH) —*Ammaar was one of them — had fought Umayyids in the 
past who were headed by Abu Sufyaan bearing the standard of 
polytheism and leading its army. They had fought them in the past 
as the glorious Qur'aan was openly commanding Muslims to fight 
disbelievers. As for today, even though they were Muslims and were 
not openly commanded by the Qur'aan to fight them, yet ~Ammaar's 
search for truth and his comprehension of the aims and goals of the 
Qur'aan persuaded them to fight so that the usurped right would be 
restored to its people and the fire of rebellion and sedition would be 
extinguished once and for all. It also signified that in the past they 
fought Umayyids for their disbelief in faith and in the Qur'aan. 
Today they were fighting them for deviating from faith and their 
turning away from the Qur'aan, their wrong interpretation and 
explanation, and their attempts to alter its verses and meaning to 
their aims and greedy wishes. 


This man of 93 was involved in the last battle of his noble and 
brave life. He was giving the last lesson about perseverence in truth, 
and bequeathing to life the last of his great, honest, and edifying 
attitudes. 


Mu‘aawiyah's men attempted to avoid “Ammaar as much as 
they could so as not to kill him with their swords and people would 
say they were the "tyrant party". Yet, “Ammaar was fighting as 
if he were a whole army and his bravery made them mad, so some of 
Mu‘ aawiyah's soldiers waited for a chance to hit him. 


* * * 


Mu‘aawiyah's army had many regular soldiers from among the 
new Muslims who had embraced Islam at the beating of the drums in 
the Islamic conquest in many of the countries liberated by Islam from 
the power of the Romans and Persians. Most of these soldiers were 
the fuel of the civil war caused by the rebellion of Mu‘aawiyah and 
his refusal to pledge allegiance to ~Aliy as Caliph and Imam. They 
were the fuel and the oil of the battle that enflamed it. 


The disagreement, in spite of its seriousness, could have 
terminated peacefully if the affairs had remained with the early 
Muslims. However, it was no sooner formed than it was taken by 
many hands that did not care about the fate of Islam, and they kept 
adding fuel to the disagreement. At noon the news of “Ammaar's 
death spread, and the Muslims went on repeating to one another the 
prophecy of Allah's Messenger (PBUH) which had been heard by all 
the Companions on the day of the festival while building the mosque: 
"Alas for Ibn Sumaiyah, killed by the tyrant party." 


Now people knew who was the "tyrant party". It was the one 
that had killed ~Ammaar, no other but Mu‘aawiyah's party. ~Aliy's 
Companions became more and more convinced of this fact. As for 
Mu*aawiyah's party, their hearts became suspicious, and some 
prepared to mutiny and turn to ~Aliy. 


No sooner did Mu‘aawiyah hear of what had happened than 
he came out announcing to the people that the prophecy was right, 
and the Messenger (PBUH) really prophesied that ~“Ammaar was 
going to be killed by the tyrant party. But who killed ~“Ammaar? 
Then he shouted to the people of his party, "He was surely killed by 
those who came with him out of his house and brought him to the 
battle." Some people who were inclined towards that interpretation 
were deceived, and the battle continued till the end. 


* * * 


As for “Ammaar, Imam ~Aliy carried him on his chest to where 
he and the other Muslims prayed, and then he was buried in his own 
clothes. Yes, in his blood-smeared clothes which had a pure and good 
smell. No silk material in the whole world could have been more 
suitable for the shroud of a graceful martyr and a great saint like 
*“Ammaar. 


Muslims stood at his grave wondering. A few hours before, 
~Ammaar had been singing over the battlefield, filled with the delight 
of the tired stranger who was returning happily home. He had been 


178 


shouting, "Today I meet the dear ones, Muhammad and _ his 
Companions." Did he have a meeting time with them, an exact time to 
wait for him? 


Some Companions approached each other, inquiring. One of 
them asked, "Do you remember the twilight of that day in Al- 
Madiinah when we were sitting with Allah's Messenger (PBUH) and 
suddenly his face brightened and he said, "Paradise is longing for 
~“Ammaar'?" His friend answered, "Yes, on that day he mentioned 
others, among which were’*Aliy, Salmaan and Bilaal." 


Paradise then was longing for ~“Ammaar. The longing remained 
for a long time while he was urging it to wait in order to accomplish 
all his tasks and complete the last of his achievements. He did them 
all following his conscience and feeling delight for his achievement. 
Was it not then time to comply with the call of longing coming from 
Paradise? Sure, it was: good is rewarded by good. That was how 
he threw aside his lance and went. 


When the dust of his grave was being leveled on his body by his 
companions, his soul was embracing its happy destiny there in the 
eternity of Paradise that was longing for ~Ammaar! 


179 


(15) 
‘UBAADAH IBN AS- SAAMIT 
A Representative in Allah's Party! 


As one of the Ansaar, he was mentioned in the Prophet's 
words “If the Ansaar chose to move in a certain direction, I would 
follow them. By Allah, if there had been no emigration, I would have 
chosen to be one of the Ansaar." ~Ubaadah Ibn As-Saamit was not 
only one of the Ansaar, but also one of their reknown leaders whom 
the Prophet (PBUH) chose to represent their people and tribes. 
When the first Ansaar delegation arrived at Makkah to make the 
oath of allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH), ‘Ubaadah (May Allah be 
pleased with him) was one of the 12 believers who pledged 
allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH), embraced Islam, and clasped the 
Prophet's hand in support and loyalty. In the Second Pledge of Al- 
*Aqabah, ‘Ubaadah was one of the leaders of the 70 men and two 
women and also one of the representatives of the Ansaar who gave 
his pledge to the Prophet (PBUH) during the Hajj season. 


Ever since, ‘Ubaadah never missed a battle or fell short of a 
sacrifice, as the arena at that time offered a kaleidoscope of self- 
sacrifice, valor, courage, and defiance. Since he chose Allah and His 
Prophet, he exerted himself to fulfil his obligations towards his 
religion. Therefore, his loyalty and obedience to Aah and his 
relationship with his relatives, allies, and enemies were all molded in 
a way so as to be compatible with the faith and conduct that a 
Muslim should have. 


In the past, “Ubaadah's family had been tied in alliance with 
the Jews of Bani Qainuqaa* in Al-Madiinah. Since the Prophet and 
his Companions emigrated to Al-Madiinah, the Jews pretended to be 
on good terms with them; but after the Battle of Badr and a little 
while before the Battle of Uhud, the Jews of Al- Madiinah began to 
show their true colors. Consequently, one of the Jewish tribes, Bani 
Qainuqaa’, fabricated reasons for commotion and strife against the 
Muslims. 


180 


As soon as ‘Ubaadah realized their real intention, he decidedly 
threw aside their ancient treaty and said, “I take Allah, His Prophet, 
and those who have believed in Him as my protectors." The Qur'aan 
descended on the Prophet (PBUH) to support, salute, and praise 
“Ubaadah's loyal and steadfast attitude saying, < And whosoever 
takes Allah, His Messenger, and those who have believed as 
Protectors, then the party of Allah wil be victorious > (5 : 56). 


+ * * 


Thus, the glorious verse announced the establishment of Allah's 
party, the members of which were the believers who stood firm by 
the Prophet's side and advocated the banner of right guidance and 
truth. They were regarded as the blessed blossom of the seed sown 
by their predecessors, who did their utmost to support their 
Messenger and invite people to believe in Allah the Ever-Living, the 
One Who Sustains and Protects all that exists. This newly born 
party of Allah would not only include the Companions of the 
Prophet, but also encompass the true believers of all future 
generations and times until Allah inherits the earth and whatever is 
with Him. 


“Ubaadah, whose loyal and faithful attitude the verse praised, 
was not only a representative of the Al-Khazraj tribe, but was also 
one of the leaders of the pious and righteous Muslims who would 
always be looked upon by future generations throughout the 
world as a symbol of chivalry and discipline. His immortal history 
will forever resound throughout the world. 


% * * 


One day ‘Ubaadah heard the Prophet talking about the 
responsibilities and obligations of commanders and governors and 
the punishment that awaited any one of them who abused his 
authority and manipulated the money entrusted to him. His words 
shook him so severely that he swore never to accept command, even 
over two people. He kept this oath. When the Commander of the 


181 


Faithful “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab (May Allah be pleased with him) 
became the caliph, he could not prevail on “Ubaadah to accept any 
influential position except educating and instructing people in Islamic 
religion. Indeed, this was the appropriate field for ‘Ubaadah, away 
from influential positions that might jeopardize his faith with 
precarious arrogance, power, and wealth. 


Therefore, he traveled with Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal and Abu Ad- 
Dardaa' to Syria, where they illuminated the country with knowledge, 
figh, and enlightment. Afterward, “Ubaadah traveled to Palestine, 
where Mu*aawiyah held jurisdiction in the name of the caliph. 


When “Ubaadah Ibn As-Saamit finally settled down in Syria, he 
always looked to Al-Madiinah as the capital of Islam and as the 
center of the caliphate where “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, a master- mind 
and a peerless man, lived. Then he turned around and looked over 
Palestine, where Mu*aawiyah Ibn Abi Sufyaan, a worldly-minded 
and a power hungry man, ruled. 


‘Ubaadah was, indeed, one of those blessed men who lived the 
best and the most accomplished days of their lives with the 
Prophet (PBUH). Those men who gained experience through struggle 
were cast in the same mold of conflict, struggle, and self-sacrifice. 
‘Ubaadah had embraced Islam out of conviction rather than fear. 
Indeed, he sold himself and his fortune to Allah. He was one of the 
men who were brought up and disciplined by Muhammad 
(PBUH), who infused them with his wisdom, enlightenment, and 
greatness. To “Ubaadah, one of the most excellent models of the 
man in power was “Umar. Naturally, if ‘Ubaadah tried to judge 
Mu‘aawiyah's conduct and character according to those standards, 
the result would not be in his favor and conflict would be inevitable. 
And that is exactly what happened. 


* * * 


“Ubaadah used to say, "We have given a pledge to the Prophet 
(PBUH) never to be afraid of anyone but Allah." ~Ubaadah was a 


man who kept his pledges; therefore, he never feared Mu*‘aawiyah. 
Although Mu*aawiyah was in authority, ‘Ubaadah had already 
taken oath to stand fast and expose his wrongdoings. 


Consequently, the people of Palestine watched him closely, 
holding their breath with astonishment, for the news of the fearless 
opposition led by “Ubaadah resounded across the world of Islam 
and was regarded as an outstanding example that should be 
followed. Notwithstanding the patience and tolerance Mu*aawiyah 
was famous for, he soon got tired of ‘Ubaadah's opposition, for he 
considered it a direct threat to his authority. Finally, when ‘Ubaadah 
realized that the gap between him and Mu‘aawiyah was widening 
fatally, he addressed Mu‘aawiyah saying, "By Allah, I will never live 
in the same land with a man like you." Consequently, he left 
Palestine and returned to Al- Madiinah. 


Definitely, ‘Umar was a man of outstanding perception and 
insight. He was so careful to surround governors like Mu*aawiyah, 
who manipulated their cleverness for their own interest, with a 
group of ascetic, pious, and steadfast Companions and advisers. 
He aimed at curbing their aspiration and avarice and reminding them 
of the era of the Prophet and his great feats. 


Therefore, no sooner had the Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar 
Ibn Al Khattaab seen ~Ubaadah in Al-Madiinah than he asked him, 
"What brought you back to Al-Madiinah?" When “Ubaadah told him 
about his dispute with Mu‘aawiyah he ordered him, "Go back to 
where you belong. By Allah, any land that has no one like you living 
in it is a wasteland." “Umar immediately sent a message to 
Mu’aawiyah saying, "You are not to rule over ‘Ubaadah." Indeed, 
“Ubaadah was a commander of himself. When a man like “Umar 
held ‘Ubaadah in such high regard, then, undoubtedly, he must be a 
great and worthy man. “Ubaadah's greatness was unveiled through 
his faith, conscientiousness, and discipline. 


This sensible representative of the Ansaar and Islam died in 
A.H. 34, and his memory and history will forever be cherished and 
honored by all Muslims. 


183 


(16) 
KHABBAAB IBN AL-ARAT 
A Master in the Art of Self-Sacrifice 


A group of the Quraish hastened to Khabbaab's house to take 
the swords they had asked him to make. Khabbaab was a 
swordmaker who sold his wares to the people of Makkah or sent 
them to its market. 


It was not like Khabbaab to leave his house and work; 
therefore, the Quraish sat there and waited for his return. After a 
long time, Khabbaab arrived. His face was bright with questions, and 
his eyes were filled with graceful tears. He immediately greeted his 
guests and sat down. They asked him in a hurry, "Khabbaab, did 
you finish making our swords?” There were no more tears in his eyes. 
Instead, his eyes were filled with bright delight. He spoke as if to 
himself, "It makes me wonder!" 


His clients asked him, "What makes you wonder? We ask you 
about our swords. Did you finish them?" 


Khabbaab gazed at them as if he were hypnotized. Then he 
asked them, “Did you see him? Did you hear him?" They looked at 
one another in astonishment. Then one of them asked slyly, "Did you 
see him Khabbaab?"” Khabbaab asked, "Whom do you mean?" 
turning the tables on him. The man answered, irritatedly, "I mean the 
same person that you mean!" 


Khabbaab answered after he had exhibited his invulnerability 
to their attempts to wrest information from him. He wanted to prove 
to them that if he were to confess his faith before them, he would 
announce it in public and would not be duped or led on. He would 
announce his Islam because he saw and embraced what was right. 


184 


He was still suspended in his ecstasy and spiritual upliftment 
when he answered, "Yes, I did see and hear him. As a matter of 
fact, I have seen him enveloped and illuminated by truth.” 


Suddenly, the Quraishi clients began to realize what he meant; 
therefore one of them shouted, "Who are you talking about, you slave 
of Umm *Ammaar?” Khabbaab answered with saintly quietude, 
"Who else but the brother Arab. Who else of your people is 
enveloped and illuminated by truth?" 


Another shouted and jumped in terror, "Do you mean 
Muhammad?" Khabbaab nodded in satisfaction and said, "Yes, he is 
the Messenger of Allah to us, to bring us out of the darkness of 
disbelief into the light of belief." 


No sooner had he finished these words than he fell unconscious. 
The only thing he remembered was waking up after long hours to find 
his clients gone and his body full of bleeding bruises and wounds! 
Nevertheless, his wide eyes encompassed his surroundings as if the 
place was too narrow for his penetrating stare. Despite the pain, he 
rose and went into the open, limping his way out of his house, leaning 
on the wall. 


His noble eyes embarked on a long, perpetual journey roaming 
about the horizon. He was not searching for the familiar dimensions 
of people, but rather for the missing dimension. Indeed, his eyes 
traveled in search of the missing dimension in his life, in Makkah, and 
in the life of people everywhere and at all times. He wondered if 
what he had heard from the Prophet on that day was the light that 
leads to the missing dimension in the life of all people. 


Khabbaab was wrapped in sublime contemplation and deep 
thought. Then he went home to treat his wounds and prepare himself 
for a new round of torture and pain. 


185 


From that day, Khabbaab occupied a foremost place among 
the oppressed and tortured who, notwithstanding their poverty and 
weakness, rose against the Quraish's haughtiness, tyranny, and 
madness. He was high in rank among those believers who were 
devoted to the standard of Islam that fluttered on the boundless 
horizon. It sounded the end of the era of paganism and despotism 
to announce the dawn of a new world, the sovereign of which is 
Allah, Who is worshipped alone by people who obey Him and do 
righteous deeds sincerely for His sake, and not to show off or set up 
rivals with Him in worship. Moreover, it announced the glad tidings 
of the emergence of the weak and oppressed people who would 
stand up as one man under the standard of Islam and would stand 
on equal terms with those who used and abused them in the past. 


Khabbaab withstood the consequences that ensued after 
embracing Islam with an outstanding courage that was becoming of a 
pioneer of Islam. Ash-Sha*biy narrated, "Khabbaab withstood all 
the horrors that the polytheists exposed him too. They went so far as 
to place burning stones onto his naked back until his flesh came off." 


Indeed, Khabbaab had his share of horrible torture, yet his 
resistance and patience were extraordinary. For instance, the 
polytheists of the Quraish turned all the iron they could find in 
Khabbaab's place — which he had used to make swords — into 
fetters and chains. They put them under the fire until they blazed, 
then chained his body, hands, and legs with them. 


One day, Khabbaab went with some of his oppressed brethren 
to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, "O Messenger of Allah, please ask 
Allah to bestow his victory and safety on us.” This was an 
expression of hope in Allah's safety rather than of faint-heartedness 
and feebleness. 


Now, let us hear the story as told by Khabbaab himself: One 
day, we went to the Prophet and found him laying his head on a 
garment in the shade of the Ka*bah, so we said to him, "O 
Messenger of Allah, we hope that you will ask Allah to bestow His 


victory and safety on us." Instantly, the Prophet sat up, and his face 
reddened as he said, "Not a long time ago, men like you who believed 
in Allah used to be dragged into a ditch where they were sawed from 
the head downwards, yet this didn't make them turn back from their 
religion. They also used to comb them with iron combs that split 
their flesh and bones, yet they didn't turn their backs on their 
religion. Believe me, Allah will put an end to all your sufferings and 
grant you victory so much so that one day, a man will travel from 
San‘aa' to Hadramawt and fear no one but Allah and the wolf, lest 
it should devour his sheep. But you have no patience." 


As soon as Khabbaab and his comrades heard these words, 
they seemed to have reached the apex of certainty and determination. 
Therefore, they decided to show Allah and the Prophet (PBUH) 
nothing but will, patience, and self-sacrifice. Khabbaab then walked 
patiently yet decidedly into the dungeons of hell. 


The Quraish were maddened by his steadfastness and 
endurance; therefore, they decided to seek the help of his former slave 
mistress, Umm *Ammaar, who became Khabbaab's principal 
torturer. For instance, she used to place burning iron on Khabbaab's 
head, yet Khabbaab deliberately controlled himself so as to deprive 
his torturer of the joy of hearing him moan. One day, the Prophet 
(PBUH) saw his head burned and blackened by the hot iron. His 
heart was full of sympathy and anguish, but there was nothing that 
he could do at that time but to supplicate Allah to our forth patience 
on him and strengthen his faith. Thus the Prophet (PBUH) raised his 
hands and supplicated,"Allah, make Khabbaab victorious over the 
disbelieving people." 


Allah brought it about a few days later. Retaliation befell Umm 
Ammaar as if destiny meant it as an ultimatum to the rest of the 
torturers. She suffered a peculiar, acute rabies attack that made her, 
according to historians, bark like dogs. At that time, she was told 
that the only cure for her ordeal was to cauterize her head. Finally, 
her stubborn head burned day and night with burning iron. 


* * * 


187 


All in all, the Quraish fought faith with torture, while the 
believers fought torture with self-sacrifice. Khabbaab was one of 
those whom Allah had chosen to take their place among the masters 
of self-denial and sacrifice. 


Not only had Khabbaab (May Allah be pleased wih him) 
devoted his time to the service of the new religion, but also to 
worshiping, praying, and instucting. He used to visit his brothers 
who hid their Islam in dread of the Quraish’s tyranny and 
despotism. There, he used to read the Qur'aan and instruct them. 
He was, truly, a genius in studying every surah and verse in the 
Qur'aan. Even ‘Abd Allah Ibn Mas‘uud, whom the Prophet praised 
by saying, "He who wants to read the Qur'aan in exactly the same 
way it descended on me, should imitate Ibn Umm * Abd", considered 
Khabbaab as a reference to all that concerns the Qur'aan, whether as 
a text or a textbook. 


Khabbaab was the one who was teaching the Qur'aan to 
Faatimah Bint Al-Khattaab and her husband Sa‘iid Ibn Zaid, when 
“Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab thrust his way right into their house with 
unsheathed sword so as to settle his account with Islam and the 
Prophet (PBUH). Allah willed that as soon as “Umar heard the verse 
in the scroll being recited in a slow and pleasant voice by Khabbaab, 
he cried out, "Tell me where Muhammad is!" When Khabbaab heard 
~Umar's words, he came out of his hiding place and said, "‘Umar, 
by Allah, I do hope that Allah chose you to fulfil the Prophet's 
supplication. For yesterday, I heard the Prophet say, ‘Allah, please 
support Islam with whom You love best, either Abi Al-Hakam Ibn 
Hishaam or “Umar Ibn Al- Khattaab.”" “Umar repeated his question, 
"Where is Muhammad now?" Khabbaab answered, "At As-Safaa in 
Daar Al-Argam Ibn Abi Argam." At that very moment, “Umar 
ascended towards his great fortune and blessed destiny. 


* * * 


Khabbaab witnessed all the battles and wars side by side with 
the Prophet. He treasured his faith and certainty throughout his life. 


When the Muslim treasury (Bait Al-Maal) overflowed with money 
during the caliphates of ‘Umar and ‘Uthmaan (May Allah be 
pleased with them both), Khabbaab had a large salary as one of the 
foremost Muslim Muhaajiruun. 


This abundant income enabled Khabbaab to build himself a 
house in Kufa. He used to put his money where all his friends, 
visitors, and those in need could find it. Nevertheless, whenever the 
Prophet (PBUH) and the Companions who sacrificed their lives for 
Allah and met Him before the Muslims became victorious and 
wealthy were mentioned, his eyes filled with tears and he became 
sleepless. 


Listen to him talking to his brothers who came to visit him on 
his deathbed. They said, “Be content, Abu “Abd Allah; you will 
meet your brothers tomorrow." His eyes flowed with tears as he 
answered, "I am not crying out of fear of death, but you reminded me 
of the brothers who left this life without enjoying any of its splendor 
or luxury, yet we have lived on until we have sucked in its splendor 
and wealth to the extent that we placed this wealth on the sand," 
and he pointed to his newly-built humble house. Then he pointed to 
the place where he kept his money and exclaimed, "By Allah, I have 
never refused to give it to anyone who asked me for it, as if the 
strings were his." Then he looked upon his shroud and said weeping, 
"Look, this is my shroud." He considered it extravagant and 
luxurious. He then said, "Yet Hamzah the Prophet's uncle, on the 
day of his martyrdom had nothing to be used for a shroud but a torn 
garment which if placed on his head, would show his feet, and if 
placed on his feet, would show his head." 


* * * 


Khabbaab died in A.H. 37. Alas, the swordmaker in paganism 
died. The master of self-denial and sacrifice in Islam died. He was 
one of the group of believers in whose defense the Qur'aan 
descended on the Prophet when the elite of the Quraish pleaded 
with the Prophet to assign a day for them and another for the poor 


189 


Muslims like Khabbaab, Suhaib and Bilaal. However, the great 
Qur'aan embraced those men of Allah to honor and glorify, and these 
verses descended on the noble Prophet: < And turn not away those 
who invoke their Lord, morning and afternoon, seeking His Face. 
You are accountable for them in nothing, and they are accountable 
for you in nothing, that you may turn them away and thus become of 
the Zalimun (unjust). Thus We have tried some of them with 
others, that they might say: "Is it these (poor believers) that Allah 
has favoured from amongst us?” Does not Allah know best those 
who are grateful? When those who believe in our Ayat (verses) 
come to you, say: "Salamun ‘Alaikum” (peace be on you); your Lord 
has written Mercy for Himself > (6 : 52). 


Thus, whenever the Prophet saw them after the descent of these 
verses, he took special care to honor them, so much so that he spread 
out his garment so that they would sit on it next to him and patted 
them on their shoulders saying, "I welcome you whom Allah enjoined 
me to favor." 


It was indeed a tragic loss when one of the pious, noble, and 
legitimate sons of revelation and the generation of sacrifice died. 


* * * 


All in all, perhaps the best farewell to Khabbaab was the words 
of Imam “Aliy (May Allah be pleased with him) when he was on his 
way back from Siffiin and saw a recently dug moist grave and asked 
about the deceased. 


They answered, "It is Khabbaab's grave." Then he contemplated 
in reverence and sorrow, "O Allah, bestow Your mercy on Khabbaab, 
for You know that he was a true Muslim, an obedient Muhaajir and a 
determined mujaahid who strove hard in the cause of Allah." 


190 


(17) 
ABU “UBAIDAH IBN AL-JARRAAH 
The Trustworthy of This Nation 


Who was the man whose right hand the Prophet (PBUH) held 
and said, "In every nation there exists a man worthy of all trust and 
the trustworthy of this nation is Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al- Jarraah."” Who 
was the man whom the Prophet sent with reinforcements to *Amr Ibn 
Al- Aas in the Dhaat As-Salaasil Expedition and made commander 
of the army that included ‘Umar and Abu Bakr? Who was this 
Companion who was the first to be called the Commander of the 
Commanders? Who was that tall, slim man with gaunt face? Who 
was that strong, trustworthy man about whom ‘Umar Ibn AI- 
Khattaab said on his deathbed, “If Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah 
were alive, | would have entrusted him with the caliphate, and if 
Allah asked me about him, I would say, | assigned the caliphate to 
the trustworthy of Allah and His Prophet, Abu ~Ubaidah Ibn Al- 
Jarraah." 


He embraced Islam at the hands of Abu Bakr As-Siddiig at the 
dawn of Islam, even before the Prophet walked into Daar Al-Argam. 
He emigrated to Abyssinia during the second emigration, then 
returned to stand by the Prophet at Badr, Uhud, and the rest of the 
great battles. 


Even after the Prophet's death, he continued to be strong and 
trustworthy in his striving during the caliphates of Abu Bakr and the 
Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar. He renounced the world and 
endured its hardships. He pursued his Islam with an admirable 
asceticism, piety, firmness, and trustworthiness. When Abu ‘Ubaidah 
took the oath of allegiance to the Messenger and dedicated his life in 
the way of Allah, he knew exactly what those words “in the way of 
Allah" meant. Moreover, he was ready to endure whatever this 
way required of self-sacrifice and self-denial. From the time he 
shook hands with the Prophet as a sign of his pledge, he looked upon 
himself and his life as something that Allah had entrusted to him to 


seek His pleasure and abandon every desire or fear that might 
distract away from Him. When Abu “Ubaidah fulfilled his pledge as 
other Companions did, the Prophet saw in his conscientiousness and 
life style that which made him worthy of the epithet he had given 
him, namely, "The Trustworthy of This Nation". 


* * * 


Abu ‘Ubaidah's trustworthiness towards his responsibilities 
was one of his most outstanding traits. For instance, in the Battle of 
Uhud, he realized from the way the battle was conducted that the 
disbelievers' first priority was to kill the great Messenger (PBUH). To 
them, achieving victory was of secondary importance compared to 
killing the Prophet. Therefore, he decided to stay very close to where 
he was. 


Abu ‘Ubaidah thrust his sword into the army of pagansim 
that craved to put out the light of Allah once and for all. Whenever 
the fierce fight led him far away from the Prophet, he fought 
ferociously while his eyes were fixed on where the Prophet stood, 
watching him with great concern. Whenever Abu “Ubaidah saw a 
potential danger approaching the Prophet, he jumped swiftly to send 
the enemies of Allah on their heels before they could injure the 
Prophet. 


When the fight reached the height of ferocity, a group of 
disbelievers closed in upon Abu ‘Ubaidah. Still his eyes were fixed 
on the Prophet like hawk eyes. Abu “Ubaidah lost his self-control 
when he saw an arrow hit the Prophet; yet he recollected himself 
and thrust his sword into those who closed in upon him as if his 
sword were amagicone. Finally, he managed to disperse them 
and darted towards the Messenger, who was wiping the noble blood 
that ran down his face with his right hand, then exclaimed, "How can 
they succeed after they tinged with blood the face of their Prophet 
who invites them to the way of Allah?" 


192 


When Abu “Ubaidah saw the two rings of the Prophet's chain 
mail that had pierced his cheeks, he rushed and held the first one 
with his front teeth and pulled it out. Yet as it fell, it took out his 
upper front teeth as well, and the same thing happened to the lower 
front teeth when he pulled out the second ring. 


Now, Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq will narrate what he saw in a more 
impressive way, so let us hear what he has to say: When the Battle 
of Uhud reached the apex of fierceness and ferocity, the Prophet was 
wounded, and two of the rings of the Prophet's mail penetrated his 
cheeks. As soon as I realized what had happened, I rushed to him. A 
man ran swiftly in the same direction and exclaimed, "Dear Allah, 
accept this deed as a sign of obedience." Then we both reached the 
Prophet, but Abu ‘Ubaidah was there before me, so he pleaded with 
me, "Please, by Allah, Abu Bakr, let me pull them out of the 
Prophet's cheeks," so I let him. Abu ‘Ubaidah held one of the rings 
with his front teeth and pulled it out along with his upper front teeth. 
Then he pulled out the second along with his lower front teeth. Thus, 
he lost his teeth. 


Abu “Ubaidah, like all the Companions, fulfilled his 
responsibilities and obligations with great honesty, and trust- 
worthiness. Accordingly, when the Prophet (PBUH) appointed him 
as a commander in Al-Khabat Expedition, he had no supplies except 
for a knapsack full of dates. Notwithstanding the difficult mission 
and long distance, Abu “Ubaidah withstood this against all odds 
with tremendous self-denial and joy. He and his soldiers marched 
for miles with nothing to eat but a few dates daily until they ran out 
of dates and had to pick up withered leaves with their bows and 
crush and swallow them with water. Hence, the expedition was 
called Al-Khabat (ie. The Struggle). They proceeded regardless of 
the danger and the risks. They did not worry about starvation or 
deprivation. The only thing that mattered to them was to accomplish 
their glorious mission under the leadership of their strong and 
trustworthy commander. 


* * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) loved this trustworthy one of his nation 
so much that he gave him preference over everyone else. For instance, 
when the Najraan delegation arrived from Yemen after they had 
embraced Islam, they asked the Prophet to send someone to them to 
teach them the Qur'aan, the Sunnah, and Islam. The Prophet told 
them, "I will send you a trustworthy man, a very trustworthy man." 
When the Companions heard this praise, every one of them prayed 
that the Prophet meant him with this praise and sincere 
recommendation. 


‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab (May Allah be pleased with him) 
narrated thus: I have never craved command in my life except on 
that day, in hope that I would be the man whom the Prophet held in 
such high esteem. Therefore, I went in intense heat to perform my 
Dhuhr prayer. When the Prophet finished leading the prayer, he 
looked to his right, then to his left. I stood on my toes to draw his 
attention to me, yet he kept on looking round until he saw Abu 
‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah and ordered him, "Go with them and judge 
in fruth between them in the matters in which they dispute." 
Afterwards, Abu *Ubaidah traveled with them. 


This incident does not mean that Abu “Ubaidah was the only 
one whom the Prophet trusted or appreciated. He was one of the 
Companions who equally shared the Prophet's invaluable trust 
and generous appreciation. But he was the only one or one of few 
who was qualified to be absent from Al-Madiinah for this mission of 
calling people to accept Islamic monotheism, for he was the perfect 
man for this assignment. He maintained his trustworthiness as a 
Companion of the Prophet, and even after his death, he upheld his 
responsibilities with admirable integrity. 


He adhered to the standard of Islam wherever he went, as a 
soldier in command with valor and esteem, and as a soldier under 
command with modesty and faithfulness. 


When Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid was the commander of the Muslim 
armies in one of the great decisive battles, the first action of “Umar 


194 


Ibn Al-Khattaab, the new caliph at the time, was to dismiss Khaalid 
and assign Abu “Ubaidah in his place. When Abu “Ubaidah received 
the message from ~Umar he decided to conceal its purport. He 
pleaded with the messenger to keep it a secret with great admirable 
asceticism, intelligence, and fidelity. When Khaalid achieved his 
great victory, and only then, did Abu “Ubaidah relay to him the 
message with extraordinary politeness. On reading the message 
Khaalid asked him, "May Allah bestow His mercy on you, Abu 
“Ubaidah. What made you keep that message from me?" The 
Trustworthy of the Nation answered, "I was afraid lest it should 
cause any confusion that might affect the army's morale. We do not 
crave life or its splendor. We are brothers before Allah." 


* + + 


Thus, Abu “Ubaidah was assigned as the commander-in-chief 
in Syria. His army was the mightiest and best equipped among the 
Muslim armies. You could hardly distinguish him from the rank and 
file of the army. He was always unassuming. When he heard that 
the people of Syria were infatuated by him and by his new rank, he 
asked them to assemble, then addressed them saying, "Fellow men, 
I'm a Muslim from the Quraish tribe. I will follow any of you like his 
shadow regardless of the color of his skin, if he is more pious and 
righteous than me." 


May Allah greet you, Aba “Ubaidah. May Allah bless the 
religion that refined you and the Prophet who instructed you. He 
said that he was a Muslim from the Quraish. His religion was Islam 
and his tribe was Quraish. For him, this sufficed as an identification. 
His being the commander -in-chief, the leader of the greatest Muslim 
army in number, equipment, and victory and the obeyed and 
respected ruler of Syria were not privileges in themselves. He was not 
ensnared by the web of conceit or haughtiness. As a matter of fact, 
all these titles and high positions were the means to a sublime 
ultimate end. 


One day, the Commander of the Faithful visited Syria and 
asked those who were at his reception, "Where is my brother?” They 
asked, "Who do you mean?” He answered, "Abu “Ubaidah Ibn Al- 
Jarraah." Soon Abu ‘Ubaidah arrived and hugged “Umar, then he 
invited him over to his house, where he had no furniture. In fact, he 
had nothing but a sword, a shield, and a saddlebag. “Umar asked 
him, smiling, "Why don't you furnish your house as people do?" Abu 
“Ubaidah readily answered, "O Commander of the Faithful, as you 
see, ] have a room to sleep in and that is enough for me." 


* * * 


One day as the Commander of the Faithful “Umar "Al-Faruuq" 
was conducting the affairs of the vast Muslim world, he received 
the sad news of Abu ‘Ubaidah's death. He tried to control himself, 
but his sadness got the better of him and his tears flowed. He asked 
Allah to bestow His mercy on his brother. He recalled his memories 
with Abu ‘Ubaidah (May Allah be pleased with him) with patience 
and tenderness. He exclaimed, "If I were to make a wish, I would 
have wished a house full of men just like Abu “Ubaidah.” 


* * * 


The Trustworthy of This Nation died in the land which he had 
purified from the paganism of the Persians and the oppression of the 
Romans. Today in Jordan lie his noble remains which once were full 
of life, goodness, and satisfaction. It does not matter if you know 
where he is buried or not, for if you want to find his grave, you will 
need no guide; the fragrance of his remains will lead you to it. 


196 


(18) 
“*UTHMAAN IBN MADH*UUN 
A "Monk" Whose Hermitage was Life 


If you attempt to arrange the Prophet's Companions in the 
order of their embracing Islam, ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh*uun will be 
number fourteen. Not only was he the first Muhaajir to die in Al- 
Madiinah, but also the first Muslim to be buried in Al-Baqii‘a. This 
glorious Companion whose life story you are about to hear was a 
great "monk". By "monk" here I mean a worshiper throughout life, 
not a monk sequestered in his hermitage, for life with all its 
commotion, turmoil, burdens, and virtues was his "hermitage". Life to 
him meant perseverance in the way of in the way of truth and 
unremitting self-denial good and righteousness. 


* *% * 


When we go back in time, when the fresh early rays of Islam 
were emanating from the Prophet's heart (PBUH) and from his words 
said in secret and seclusion, ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh*‘uun was there. He 
was one of the few who rushed to the way of Allah and supported 
the Prophet. When the Prophet (PBUH) ordered the few oppressed 
believers to emigrate to Abyssinia, he wanted to save them from the 
Quraish's oppression, while he chose to be left behind to face it alone. 
“Uthmaan, who was at the head of the first group of fugitives, was 
accompanied by his son, As-Saa'ib. They set their faces towards a 
far-away land fleeing the plots of Abu Jahl, Allah's enemy, and the 
Quraish's atrocities. 


The emigration of ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh*uun — and likewise for 
the rest of the emigrants to Abyssinia in the first and second 
emigrations — only made him hold more firmly to his Islam. 
Definitely, the two emigrations to Abyssinia represented a unique 


197 


and glorious phenomenon in the cause of Islam, for those who 
believed in Muhammad (PBUH) and followed the light that had been 
sent down to him had had enough of paganism, error, and ignorance. 
Their common sense shunned the idolatry of statues made of rocks 
and clay. When these fugitives emigrated to Abyssinia, they found 
an already prevalent and highly disciplined religion with an 
established clerical hierarchy of bishops and _ priests. 
Notwithstanding their attitude towards this religion, it was definitely 
remote from both the familiar paganism practiced back home and the 
usual idolatrous rites they had left behind. Undoubtedly, the clergy 
in Abyssinia exerted much effort to lure those emigrants to 
apostatize and embrace Christianity. 


In spite of all this, those emigrants stood steadfast in their 
profound loyalty to Islam and to the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). 
They anxiously yearned for the day when they would return to their 
beloved country so as to worship Allah and support the great 
Prophet (PBUH) in the mosque in peacetime and in the battlefield 
when the power of disbelief forced them to take up arms. Thus, 
those emigrants who lived in Abyssinia felt secure and peaceful. 
‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh*‘uun was one of them, yet his expatriation did 
not make him forget his cousin Umaiyah Ibn Khalaf's plots and the 
abuse he dealt him and other Muslims. Hence, he used to amuse 
himself by rehearsing threats to him, saying, "1 hope that all the 
arrows you aim will miss their target and strike back at you. You 
fought against generous and noble people and tortured them to death. 
You will soon be punished, and the common people you used to 
despise will get back at you." 


* * * 


While the emigrants were, despite their exile, wrapped up in 
their worship of Allah and the study of the Qur'aan, news spread 
that the Quraish had submitted themselves to Islam and prostrated 
themselves to Allah, the One, the Irresistable. 


198 


Hurriedly, driven by their nostalgic feelings, the emigrants 
packed up their belongings and hastened to Makkah. However, no 
sooner had they reached Makkah's outskirts than they realized that 
the news about the Quraish's submission to Islam was only the bait to 
lure them to return. Suddenly, they realized that their excessive 
credulity had led them right into this trap, yet there was nothing they 
could do, for Makkah was in sight and there was no escape 
whatsoever. Makkah's unbelievers were overjoyed to hear that their 
long-awaited prey was caught in the trap they had laid. 


At that time, the right of protection — to be under the 
assistance, support, refuge, and protection of his patron — was a 
sacred and honored Arab tradition. Consequently, if a weak man had 
a claim on a man of high standing, he would instantly enjoy the 
privileges of the right of protection and would be under an invincible 
protection and safety. Naturally, not all of those who returned to 
Makkah had claims on a high-ranking man. Therefore, few enjoyed 
the protection and safety guaranteed by this right. Among those who 
did was “Uthmaan Ibn Madh*uun, who had a claim on Al Waliid Ibn 
Al-Mughiirah. Hence, he entered Makkah safely and peacefully and 
attended its councils without being humiliated or harmed. 


* * * 


Yet, every time Ibn Madh*uun — the man who had been refined 
by the Qur'aan and whom the Prophet (PBUH) had taught and 
disciplined — looked around, he saw his weak, poor Muslim brothers 
who had no claim on the right of protection being atrociously abused 
_ and unjustly haunted, while he sat safe and sound in his sanctuary 
away from the least provocation. His free spirit rebelled and his 
noble compassion got the better of him. Hence, he decided to throw 
aside Al-Waliid's patronage and take off his shoulders this 
burdensome sanctuary that deprived him of the bliss of enduring 
abuse in the way of Allah and of following his Muslim brothers who 
were the believing vanguard and the glad tidings of the world that 
would afterwards overflow with faith, monotheism, and light. Let us 
now call an eyewitness to narrate what occurred. 


199 


When ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh‘uun saw the affliction that had 
befallen the Prophet's Companions while he was free and safe under 
Al-Waliid Ibn Al-Mughiirah's protection, he said to himself, "By 
Allah, I realize now that I have a fatal flaw in my character, for here I 
am sound under the protection of a disbeliever while my brothers and 
companions are being abused and tortured by disbelievers." 
Instantly, he hastened to Al-Waliid Ibn Al- Mughiirah and spoke. 
Aby Abd Shams, you have been a dutiful friend, you did your utmost 
to honor the ties of kinship. But now I must forsake my claim on 
you." Al-Waliid asked him, "Why, nephew? Did any of my people 
lay a finger on you?" He answered, "No, but I'm fully satisfied with 
Allah's protection and sanctuary and I do not want to resort to 
anyone but Him. So please come with me to the mosque and 
withdraw your protection and support in public." They both 
hastened to the mosque. Then Al-Waliid cried out, ““Uthmaan has 
asked me to withdraw my protection and support from him." 
‘Uthmaan said, "He was indeed a loyal, dutiful, and generous 
patron, but I do not like to resort to the protection and help of 
anyone but Allah." 


As ~Uthmaan was leaving, Lubaid Ibn Rabii‘ah was sitting in 
one of the Quraish's meetings reciting poetry, so he decided to join 
them and sat down and heard Lubaid recite, "Everything but Allah is 
falsehood." *Uthmaan nodded and said, "You spoke the truth." 
Lubaid continued, "Every blessing is transient." ~Uthmaan objected 
saying, "You are a liar, for the blessings of Paradise are eternal." 
Lubaid said, "O you Quraish, by Allah, I have not heard before 
that anyone dared to call a man who was attending your meeting 
names." A man of Quraish explained, "Do not pay attention to what 
he says, for he is a fool who has turned apostate." *Uthmaan 
objected to the man's insult and both quarrelled until the man lost his 
temper and punched “Uthmaan's eye ruthlessly. 


Nearby was Al-Waliid Ibn Al-Mughiirah, who saw what had 
happened and said, " By Allah, nephew, you could have spared 
yourself the pain if you had stayed under my invulnerable 
protection." ~Uthmaan answered, "On the contrary, my healthy eye 


200 


yearns for the pain of my abused eye. I am under the protection of 
Allah, Who is far better and more capable than you, Abu “Abd 
Shams.” Al-Waliid urged him saying, "Come on nephew, be sensible 
and return to my sanctuary and protection." Ibn Madh‘uun said 
firmly, "No." After he left, the pain in his eye was severe yet his 
spirit was revived, strengthened, and reassured. On his way home he 
recited, "I don't care if a deluded disbeliever hurt my eye, for it was 
in the way of Allah. For the Most Merciful will reward me on the 
Day of Reckoning in compensation for it. My people, if Allah 
attempts to please someone, then he will be undoubtedly a happy 
man. Even if you say that I'm a misguided fool, my life will always 
be consecrated to the Prophet Muhammad's religion (PBUH). I will 
always do my utmost to please Allah, for our religion is the only truth 
despite abuse and oppression. 


* * * 


Thus he set an example that was highly becoming of him. In 
fact, life witnessed the remarkable scene of an excellent man whose 
graceful, immortal words will resound: "By Allah, my healthy eye 
yearns to be hurt in the way of Allah. I am under the protection and 
care of Someone far better and more capable than you.” Obviously 
the scenario of “Uthmaan’s abuse at the hands of the Quraish after he 
had renounced Al-Waliid's protection was premeditated on his part. 
He provoked it and was overjoyed by it, for this abuse was to him 
like the fire that matures, purifies, and ennobles his faith. At last, he 
followed the foot steps of his believing brothers who did not accept 
intimidation. 


* * * 


e 


Afterwards, ‘Uthmaan decided to emigrate to Al-Madiinah 
where he would not be haunted or harassed by Abu Jahl, Abu Lahab, 
Umaiyah, ~Utbah, or any of the other ruthless disbelievers who 
abused and tormented the Muslims. He traveled to Al-Madiinah 
with those great Companions who survived the hardships, terror, and 
horror of the trials with admirable steadfastness and stoutness. They 


201 


did not emigrate to Al-Madiinah to rest. On the contrary, Al- 
Madiinah was the springboard that enabled Muslims to strive in the 
way of Allah all over the world, clinging to Allah's flag and spreading 
His words, signs, and guidance. 


When “Uthmaan had settled in the illuminated Madiinah, his 
remarkable, great qualities were unveiled. He ultimately emerged as 
an ascetic, devout, and repentant worshiper. To sum up, he was the 
glorious and intelligent "monk" who was not sequestered in his 
hermitage but rather in life. He spent his life striving in the way of 
Allah. Indeed, he was the worshiper by night and the fighter by day. 
In fact, he was the worshipper and the fighter of both night and day. 


Although all the Prophet's (PBUH) Companions at that time 
were inclined to asceticism and devoutness, yet Ibn Madh*uun had a 
certain strategy in that respect, for he was so remarkably absorbed in 
his asceticism and devoutness that he turned his life, day and night, 
into a perpetual blessed prayer and a sweet long glorification. No 
sooner had he sipped the sweetness of the engrossement in worship 
than he hastened to abandon all the enticing luxury and splendor of 
life. Therefore, he wore nothing but coarse clothes and ate nothing 
but coarse food. 


One day, he walked into the mosque in which the Prophet 
(PBUH) and his Companions were sitting, and he had on a faded, 
worn-out garment that was patched with a piece of fur. As soon as 
the Prophet (PBUH) saw him, he sympathized with him, and the 
Companions’ eyes were filled with tears, yet the Prophet (PBUH) 
said, “Would you like it if you were rich enough to have as many 
garments as you like and as much food as you like? Would you like 
your upholstery to be as expensive as the clothes used in covering the 
Ka*bah." The Companions answered, "We would indeed! We would 
like to live in luxury surrounded by the splendors of life." The 
Prophet (PBUH) commented, "You will be wealthy, but you are 
today far better in your piety and devoutness than you will when 
you are wealthy." Naturally, when Ibn Madh‘uun heard the Prophet's 
words, he clung more and more to his austere and coarse life. He 


202 


went so far as to renounce sexual intercourse with his wife, yet when 
the Prophet (PBUH) heard about this exaggerated attitude, he 
summoned him and said, "Your wife has the right to have sexual 
intercourse with you." 


The Prophet (PBUH) loved him dearly. When his pure spirit 
was embarking on its journey towards Heaven, the Prophet (PBUH) 
was next to him, paying his last farewell to the first Muhaajir to die 
in Al-Madiinah and the first to be raised to Paradise. He leaned to 
kiss his forehead and his amiable eyes flowed with tears that wet 
‘Uthmaan's face, which looked remarkably graceful. The Prophet 
(PBUH) paid his last farewell to his beloved Companion by saying, 
"Allah bestow His mercy on you, Abu As-Saa'ib. You are now 
leaving life that was not able to seduce or mislead you." 


* * * 


The revered Prophet (PBUH) did not forget his Companion 
after his death; on the contrary, he often mentioned and praised him. 
For instance, his very last words to his daughter Ruqaiyah on her 
deathbed were, "Go on, follow in the pious and devout ‘Uthmaan Ibn 
Madh*uun's footsteps up to Paradise." 


203 


(19) 
ZAID IBN HAARITHAH 
The Beloved 


In the Battle of Mu'tah, the Prophet (PBUH) stood to pay his 
farewell to the departing Muslim army on its way to fight the Romans 
and to announce the name of the three successive commanders of the 
army: "Zaid Ibn Haarithah is your first commander, but in case he is 
wounded, Ja*far Ibn Abi Taalib will take over the command, and if 
the latter is wounded then “Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah will replace 
him." But who was Zaid Ibn Haarithah. Who was the beloved one of 
the Prophet (PBUH)? 


Narrators and historians described his appearance as short, 


dark, swarthy, and snub-nosed. As for his reality, he was truly a 
great Muslim. 


If we go back in time, we will see Haarithah, Zaid's father, just 
putting the luggage on the camel that was to carry his wife, Sudah, to 
her family. Haarithah paid his farewell to his wife who carried Zaid 
— at that time a young child — in her arms. But every time he was 
about to leave his wife and child who were going with a caravan, to 
return to his house and work, he was driven by a mysterious and 
inexplicable urge to keep his wife and son in sight; yet it was time for 
them to set out on their way and Haarithah had to pay his last 
farewell to his wife and head back home. His tears flowed as he said 
goodbye and stood as if pinned to the ground until he lost sight of 
them. At that moment, he felt broken-hearted. 


* * * 


Su*dah stayed with her family for a while. One day, suddenly 
her neighborhood was attacked by one of its opposing tribes. Taken 
by surprise, Bani Ma*‘n were defeated and Zai Ibn Haarithah was 


204 


captured along with other war prisoners. His mother returned home 
alone. When Haarithah heard the sad news, he was thunderstruck. 
He traveled everywhere and asked everyone about his beloved Zaid. 
He recited these lines of poetry on the spur of the moment to lament 
the loss of his son: 


My heart was broken when I lost Zaid. I don't know if 
he is alive or dead or if I will ever see him again. By 
Allah, | still do not know if he was killed on the plain 
or slain on the mountain. His picture comes to the 
mind's eye whenever the sun rises or sets. Even when 
the wind blows, it brings along his memory. Alas, I am 
shrouded by my sadness, grief, and fear for him. 


* * * 


At that time, slavery was a recognized and established social 
fact that turned into a necessity. This was the case in Athens, which 
had long enjoyed a flourishing civilization, in Rome, and in the entire 
ancient world, including the Arab Peninsula. When the opposing 
tribe attacked the Bani Ma‘n, it headed to the market of “Ukaadh, 
held at that time, to sell its prisoners of war. The child Zaid, was 
sold to Hakiim Ibn Huzaam, who gave him to his aunt Khadiijah as a 
gift. At that time, Khadiijah was married to Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd 
Allah but the revelation had not yet descended on him. However, he 
enjoyed all the promising great qualities of prophets (PBUH). 
Khadiijah, on her part, gave her servant Zaid as a gift to her husband, 
Allah's Prophet. He was very pleased with Zaid and manumitted 
him at once. His great and compassionate heart overflowed with 
care and love towards the boy. 


Later on, during one of the Hajj seasons, a group of Haarithah's 
tribe ran into Zaid in Makkah and told him about his parents anguish 
and grief ever since they had lost him. Zaid asked them to convey his 
love and longing to his parents. He told them, "Tell my father that I 
live here with the most generous and loving father." No sooner did his 
father know his son's whereabouts than he hastened on his way to 
him, accompanied by his brother. 


205 


As soon as they reached Makkah, he asked about the 
trustworthy Muhammad. When he met him, he said, "O son of Ibn 
Abd Al-Muttalib! O son of the master of his tribe! Your land is one 
of security and sanctuary and you are famous for helping the 
distressed and sheltering the captive. We have come here to ask you 
to give us back our son. So please confer a favor on us and set a 
reasonable ransom for him." The Prophet knew the great love and 
attachment Zaid carried in his heart for him, yet at the same time, he 
respected Haarithah's parental right. Therefore, he told Haarithah, 
"Ask Zaid to come here and make him choose between you and me. If 
he chooses you, he is free to go with you, but if he chooses me then, 
by Allah, I will not leave him for anything in the world." Haarithah's 
face brightened, for he did not expect such magnanimity; therefore, 
he said, "You are far more generous than us." Then the Prophet 
(PBUH) summoned Zaid. When he came he asked him, "Do you 
recognize these people?" Zaid said, "Yes, this is my father and this 
is my uncle." 


The Prophet (PBUH) told him what he had told Haarithah. 
Zaid replied, "I will not choose anyone but you, for you are a father 
and an uncle to me." The Prophet's eyes were full of thankful and 
compassionate tears. He held Zaid’s hand and walked to the 
Ka*bah, where the Quraish were holding a meeting, and cried out, “I 
bear witness that Zaid is my son, and in case I die first, he will 
inherit from me, and in case he dies first, I will inherit from him." 
Haarithah was overjoyed, for not only had his son been manumitted 
but he had also become the son of the man who was known by the 
Quraish as "The Honest and Trustworthy". Moreover, he was a 
descendant of Bani Haashim and was raised to a high station among 
his people. 


Zaid's father and uncle returned back home leaving their son 
safe and sound after he had become master of himself and after the 
Prophet (PBUH) had set to rest their fears concerning his fate. 


* * * 


206 


The Prophet (PBUH) adopted Zaid and from that moment on 
he was known as Zaid Ibn Muhammad. 


Suddenly, on a bright morning whose brightness has never been 
seen before or since, the revelation descended on Muhammad: <Read! 
In the name of your Lord who created - created mankind from 
something which clings; read! And your Lord is the Most Noble; who 
taught by the pen; taught mankind what he did not know > (96:1-5). 
Then the revelation continued: <O you encovered --- Arise and warn! 
And magnify your Lord> (74:1-3). <O Messenger! Proclaim the 
message which has been sent down to you from your Lord. And if 
you do not, then you have not conveyed His message. Allah will 
protect you from mankind. Verily, Allah guides not the people who 
disbelieve> (5 : 61). 


As soon as the Prophet (PBUH) had shouldered the 
responsibility of his message, Zaid submitted himself to Islam. 
Narrators said that he was the second man and more probably the 
first man to embrace Al-Islam. 


* * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) loved Zaid so dearly due to his singular 
loyalty, greatness of spirit, conscientiousness, honesty, and trust- 
worthiness. All this and more, made Zaid Ibn Haarithah or Zaid the 
Beloved One, as the Companions used to call him, hold a 
distinguished place in the Prophet's heart (PBUH). ~Aa'ishah (May 
Allah be pleased with her) said, "The Prophet (PBUH) never sent 
Zaid on an expedition but as a commander and if his life had not 
been so short, he would have made him his successor." 


Was it possible for anyone to be held in such great esteem by 
the Prophet? What was Zaid really like? 


As we have mentioned, he was that boy who had been 
kidnapped, sold, and manumitted by the Prophet (PBUH). He was 
this short, swarthy, snub-nosed man. Above all, he had a 


207 


compassionate heart and a free soul. Therefore, he was raised to the 
highest position by his Islam and the Prophet's love for him, for 
neither Islam nor the Prophet (PBUH) took notice of descent or 
prestige. Muslims like Bilaal , Suhaib, Khabbaab, ~Ammaar, 
Usaamah and Zaid were all alike according to this great religion. 
Each one of them played an important and distinctive role in giving 
impetus to the rapidly spreading religion. These saintly ones and 
commanders were the sparkling stars of Islam. Islam rectified life 
values when the glorious Qur'aan said: <Surely, the most honorable 
among you in the sight of Allah are the most pious of you > (49:13). 
Moreover, it encouraged all promising talents and all pure, 
trustworthy, and productive potentialities. 


The Prophet (PBUH) married his cousin Zainab to Zaid. It 
seems that Zainab (May Allah be pleased with her) accepted that 
matriage because her shyness prevented her from turning down the 
Prophet's intercession. Unfortunately, the gap between them 
widened every day, and finally their marriage collapsed. The 
Prophet (PBUH) felt that he was , in a way, responsible for this 
marriage which ended up in divorce; therefore, he married his 
cousin and chose anew wife, Umm Kulthuum Bent “Uqbah for 
Zaid. The slanderers and the enemies of the Prophet spread doubt 
concerning the legality of Muhammad's marriage to his son's ex-wife. 


The Qur'aan refuted their claims by striking a distinction 
between sons and adopted sons. It abrogated adoption altogether 
saying: <Mohammed is not a father of any man among you, but he is 
the Messenger of Allah and the last of the Prophets. > (33:90). 
Hence, Zaid was called after his father's name once again, namely, 
Zaid Ibn Haarithah. 


Now, do you see the Muslim troops that marched towards the 
Battle of Al-Jumuuh? Their commander was Zaid Ibn Haarithah. Do 
you see those Muslims troops that marched to At- Tarf, Al-lis, and 
Hismii and other battles? The commander of all those battles was 


208 


Zaid Ibn Haarithah. Truly, as ~Aa'ishah (May Allah be pleased with 
her) said, "The Prophet never sent Zaid on as expedition but as a 
commander." 


At last, the Battle of Mu'tah took place. It seems that the 
Romans and their senescent empire were filled with apprehensions 
and forebodings about the rapid spread of Islam. They saw it as a 
genuine and fatal threat to their very existence, especially in Syria, 
which bordered the center of the new, sweeping religion. Therefore, 
they used Syria as a springboard to the Arab Peninsula and the 
Muslim nation. 


The Prophet (PBUH) realized that the aim of the Roman 
skirmishes was to test the Muslim combat readiness. Therefore, he 
decided to take the initiative and exhibit in action Islam's 
determination to resist and to gain ultimate victory. On 1 
Jumaadii A.H. 8, the Muslim army marched towards Al-Balqaa’ in 
Syria until they reached its borders where Heraclius's armies of the 
Romans and Arabicized tribes residing at the borders were. The 
Roman army pitched camp at a place called Mashaarif, whereas the 
Muslim army pitched camp near a town called Mu'tah. Hence, the 
battle was named Mu'tah. 


= * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) knew how important and crucial this 
battle was; therefore he chose for its command three of those who 
were worshippers by night and fighters by day. Those three fighters 
sold their lives and property to Allah and renounced their needs and 
desires for the sake of great martyrdom which would pave their way 
to win Allah's pleasure and to see Allah, the Generous. These three 
commanders were in succession: Zaid Ibn Haarithah, Jafar Ibn Abi 
Taalib and ~Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah. (May Allah be pleased with 
tnem and they with Him, and may Allah be pleased with all the 
Companions.) Thus, the Prophet (PBUH) stood to bid farewell to his 


209 


army and gave them his order saying, "Zaid Ibn Haarithah is your 
first commander, but in case he is wounded, Ja‘far Ibn Abi Taalib will 
take over the command, and if he is also wounded, ~Abd Allah Ibn 
Rawaahah will take it over." 


Although Ja*far Ibn Abi Taalib was one of the Prophet's closest 
friends who had valor, fearlessness, and good lineage, yet the 
Prophet chose him as the second commander after Zaid. Thus, the 
Prophet (PBUH) stressed the fact that the new religion of Islam came 
to abolish corrupt human relationships based on false and superficial 
discrimination. It established new, rational human relationships 
instead. 


It was as if the Prophet foresaw the proceedings of the 
imminent battle, for he assigned the command of the army to Zaid, 
Ja‘far, and then ‘Abd Allah and strangely enough, all of them were 
raised to Allah in the same order set by him. When the Muslims saw 
the vanguard of the Roman army, which they had estimated at 
200,000 warriors, they were stunned by its enormity that surpassed 
all expectation. But since when did the battles of faith depend on 
number? 


At that moment, the Muslims flung themselves into the 
battlefield regardless of the consequences or jeopardy. Their 
commander, Zaid, carried the Prophet's standard and fought his way 
through the enemy's spears, arrows, and swords. He was not so much 
searching for victory as for concluding his deal with Allah, Who has 
purchased the lives and properties of Muslims in exchange for 
Paradise. 


Zaid saw neither the sand of Al-Balqaa' nor the Roman forces. 
The only things that he saw were the hills of Paradise and its green 
cushions. These images flickered through his mind like the fluttering 
flags that had announced his wedding day. When he thrust and 


210 


struck, he not only smote at the necks of his enemies, but also flung 
the doors open that stood in his way to the vast door through which 
he would reach the home of peace, the eternal Paradise and Allah's 
company. Zaid clung to his destiny. His spirit, on its way up to 
heaven, was overjoyed as it took its last glance at the body of its 
master that was not covered with soft silk but rather with pure blood 
shed in the way of Allah. His serene smile widened when he saw the 
second commander, Ja*far, dart towards the standard and hold it 
high before it touched the ground. 


211 


(20) 
JA*FAR IBN ABI TAALIB 
You Resemble Your Prophet in Your Looks and Conduct 


Notice his majestic youth and blooming vigor, patience, 
compassion, piety, modesty, and devoutness. Notice his 
fearlessness, generosity, purity, chastity, honesty, and 
trustworthiness. Notice his magnificent nature, virtue, and greatness. 
Do not let the fact that ali these excelling traits were found in one 
man astonish you, for you are looking at a man who resembled the 
Prophet in his looks and conduct. The Prophet gave him the epithet 
"Father of the Poor" and the agnomen "The Two Winged". You are 
about to meet the twittering heavenly sparrow, Ja‘far Ibn Abii Taalib, 
one of the great Muslims who contributed much to shaping the 
conscience of life. 


He embraced Islam and was raised to a high station among the 
early believers. On the same day, his wife, Asmaa' Bint “Umais, 
submitted herself to Islam. They had their share of abuse and 
oppression, which they withstood with courage and joy. When the 
Prophet (PBUH) advised his Companions to emigrate to Abyssinia, 
Jafar and his wife were among those who acted upon his advice. 
There, they settled for a number of years, during which they had three 
children: Muhammad, “Abd Allah and *Awf. 


In Abyssinia, Ja‘far Ibn Abi Taalib was the eloquent Companion 
who won through in the way of Allah and His Prophet, for among 
Allah's graces bestowed on him were his noble heart, alert mind, 
sagacious spirit, and fluent speech. The Battle of Mu'tah, in which 
he was martyred, was his most magnificent, glorious and immortal 
feat. Yet the Day of Al-Mujaawarah, which he executed before 


212 


An-Najaashii in Abyssinia, was not less in magnificence, glory 
and grace. In fact, it was a singular battle of words and an 
impressive scene. 


Now, the Muslim emigration to Abyssinia did not set the fears 
of the Quraish to rest nor lessen their grudges and spite against the 
Muslims. On the contrary, the Quraish were afraid lest the Muslims 
should gain momentum there and increase in number and power. If 
that did not happen, the Quraish's haughtiness and arrogance could 
not accept the fact that those fugitives had fled their tyranny and 
ruthlessness and had settled in another country which the Prophet 
(PBUH) saw as a promising land for Islam. Therefore, the Quraish 
leaders decided to send delegates to An-Najaashii with expensive 
gifts and the hope that he would expel those fugitives from his 
country. The two chosen delegates were “Abd Allah Ibn Abi Rabii*‘ah 
and ~Amr Ibn Al-Aas before they had embraced Islam. 


* * * 


An-Najaashii, or Negus, the emperor of Abyssinia, was an 
enlightened believer. Deep inside he embraced a rational and pure 
Christianity, void of deviation, fanaticism, and narrow-mindedness. 
He was renowned and highly admired for his justice. Hence, the 
Prophet (PBUH) chose his country for his Companions’ immigration. 
Now, the Quraish were afraid lest they should not be able to 
convince him of their viewpoint. Therefore, their two delegates 
carried many expensive gifts for the bishops and archbishops of the 
church and were advised not to meet An-Najaashii until they had 
given those presents to the bishops and convinced them of their 
viewpoint so that they would support them before An-Najaashii. 


As soon as the two delegates arrived in Abyssinia, they met the 
spiritual leaders and lavished the gifts on them. Then they sent 
An-Najaashii his presents. Afterwards, they began to incite the 
priests and bishops against the Muslim immigrants and asked them 


213 


to support them in their plea to An-Najaashii to expel them. A 
day was set for the Muslims to meet An-Najaashii and confront, 
before his eyes, their spiteful and mischevious enemies. 


* * * 


On the appointed day, An-Najaashii sat on the throne in 
awesome dignity, surrounded by the bishops and his retinue. Right in 
front of him in the vast hall sat the Muslim immigrants, enveloped by 
Allah's calmness, tranquility, and mercy which He had sent down 
upon them. The two Quraish delegates stood to reiterate their 
accusation which they had presented before An-Najaashii in a 
private meeting right before this huge audience. 


They said, "Your Majesty, you well know that a group of fools 
have turned renegade and have taken asylum in your country. They 
did not embrace your religion, but rather invented their own religion 
that neither of us know. We are people of high rank who are related 
to their fathers, uncles, and tribes, so that you would surrender those 
wretched renegades to us." 


An-Najaashii addressed the Muslims saying, "What is that 
religion that made you abandon your people's religion and refuse to 
embrace our religion?” Ja‘afar stood to perform the task for which he 
had been chosen by mutual consultation immediately before this 
meeting. Jafar stood up slowly and gracefully, looked with 
appreciation at the hospitable king and said, "O your Majesty, we 
used to be a people of ignorance. We worshipped idols, ate dead 
animals, committed great sin, severed family relations, and acted 
according to the law of the jungle. We used to believe that survival 
was only for the fittest until Allah sent from among us a 
Prophet (PBUH) who was known for his noble descent, honesty, 
trustworthiness, and chastity. He invited us to worship Allah 
alone and abstain from worshipping stones and idols. He ordered us 
to speak nothing but the truth and to render back our trusts to those 
whom they are due. Moreover, he ordered us to keep our ties of 
kinship intact, be good to our neighbors, and abstain from what is 


forbidden. He also ordered us not to commit evil, nor to say false 
statements, nor to eat up the property of orphans, nor to accuse 
chaste women of wrong-doing without proof or witness. Hence, we 
believed in him and in Allah's message to him. We worshipped Allah 
alone. We rejected that which we used to associate with Him as His 
partners. We allowed as lawful what is halaal and prohibited as 
unlawful what is haraam. Consequently, we were harassed and 
abused by our people, who tried to turn us away from what Allah 
had sent down to the Prophet (PBUH) so that we may return to idol 
worshiping and the evil and unlawful deeds we used to do. We were 
oppressed, abused and straitened in a way that prevented us from 
the proper worship of Allah. They even tried to force us to turn 
apostate. Therefore, we fled to your country and asked for asylum to 
escape oppression and tyranny." 


* * * 


When Ja*far finished his glorious words which were as clear as 
daylight, An-Najaashii was gripped by compassion and grace. He 
iddressed Ja‘far saying, "Do you have a scroll on which you have 
written the words of your Prophet?" Ja‘far replied, "Yes." An- 
Najaashii ordered, "Read it aloud." Ja*far recited a number of verses 
from Surat Maryam in such a slow, sweet, subdued, and captivating 
voice that it made An-Najaashii and all his bishops cry. 


When he wiped his tears he swiftly said to the Quraish 
delegates, “These words, of what had descended on ‘lisaa (Jesus), 
come from the very same source as that of “lisaa. You are free men in 
a free land. By Allah, I will never surrender you to them." 


+ * * 


The meeting was over. Allah had helped the Muslims and 
made their feet firm; whereas the Quraish delegates were bitterly 
defeated. Yet “Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas was a resourceful, crafty man who 
could neither accept defeat nor despair easily. Therefore, no sooner 
had he returned to their residence than he sat turning the matter over 


in his mind. Then he addressed his comrade saying, "By Allah, I will 
go to An-Najaashii tomorrow and I will pluck the Muslims out from 
this land once and for all." His comrade replied, "You must not do 
that, for despite their disobedience, they are still related to us." “Amr 
said, "By Allah, I will tell An-Nayaashii that they claim that “lisaa 
Ibn Maryam is a slave like the rest of Allah's slaves." Thus the web 
was spun by the shrewd delegate so as to lead the Muslims unawares 
right into the trap. The Muslims were put ina tight corner, for if they 
said that “Iisaa was Allah's slave, they would incite the king and 
bishops against them, and if they denied the fact that he was human, 
then they would turn from their religion. 


* * * 


On the following day, “Amr hastened to meet the king and said, 
"Your Majesty, those Muslims utter an awful saying against ‘lisaa." 
At once, the bishops were agitated by this short but fatal sentence. 
They asked the Muslims once again to meet the king so as to clarify 
their religious standpoint concerning ‘lisaa. 


When the Muslims found out about the new plot, they 
discussed the possibilities, then agreed to say nothing but the truth 
as said by the Prophet (PBUH), regardless of the consequences. 
Once again, the audience was held and An-Najaashii started it by 
asking Ja‘far, "What does your religion say about “lisaa?" Ja‘far, 
stood once again like a gleaming lighthouse and said, "We say what 
has descended on our Prophet (PBUH): he is Allah's slave, 
Messenger, His word which He bestowed, and a spirit created by 
Him." An-Najaashii cried out in assent and said that the same 
words had been said by “lisaa to describe himself, but the lines of 
bishops roared in disapproval. Nevertheless, the enlightened, 
believing An-Najaashii declared, “You are free to go now. My land is 
your sanctuary. Anyone who dares to abuse or mistreat you in any 
way will be severely punished.” He addressed his retinue and 
pointed towards the Quraish delegation declaring, "Give them back 
their presents, for I do not want them. By Allah, Allah did not take 
a bribe from me when He restored my kingdom; therefore, I will not be 
bribed against Him!" 


_After the Quraish delegates had been utterly disgraced, they 
headed back to Makkah. 


The Muslims headed by Ja*far went on with their secure life in 
Abyssinia. They settled in the "most hospitable land of the most 
hospitable people" until Allah gave them permission to return to their 
Prophet (PBUH), who was celebrating with the Muslims the 
conquest of Khaibar when Ja‘afar and the rest of the emigrants to 
Abyssinia arrived. The Prophet's (PBUH) heart was filled with joy, 
happiness, and optimism. 


The Prophet (PBUH) hugged him and said, "I do not know 
which makes me feel happier, Khaibar's conquest or Ja‘far's arrival.” 
The Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions traveled to Makkah to 
perform the ‘Umrah to make up for the missed ‘Umrah. Then they 
returned to Al-Madiinah. Ja‘far was overjoyed with the news he 
heard concerning the heroism and valor of his believing brothers who 
had fought side by side with the Prophet (PBUH) in the Battles of 
Badr, Uhud and others. His eyes filled with tears over the 
Companions who had been true to their covenant with Allah and 
had fulfilled their obligations as obedient martyrs. Ja‘far craved 
Paradise more than anything in the world. He awaited impatiently 
the glorious moment in which he would win martyrdom. 


* * * 


The Battle of Mu'tah, as we have already mentioned, was 
imminent. Ja*far realized that this battle was his lifetime chance to 
either achieve a glorious victory for Allah's religion or win martyrdom 
in the way of Allah. Therefore, he pleaded with the Prophet (PBUH) 
to let him fight in this battle. Jafar knew beyond doubt that this 
battle was neither a picnic nor a limited war, but rather an 
unprecedented crucial war, for it was against the armies of a vast 
and powerful empire that excelled the Arabs and Muslims in 
numbers, equipment, expertise, and finance. He yearned to have a 
role in it. 


217 


Thus, he was the second of the three commanders. The two 
armies met in combat on a distressful day. Jafar would have been 
excused if he had been gripped by terror when he saw the 200,000 
warriors. Instead, he was gripped by overflowing exaltation, for he 
felt urged by the pride of the noble believer and the self-confidence of 
the hero to fight with his equals. 


Again, hardly had the standard touched the sand as it slipped 
from Zaid Ibn Haarithah's right hand, when Ja‘far darted and picked 
it up and broke through the line of the enemy with incredible 
fearlessness. It was the fearlessness of a man who was not so much 
craving victory as martyrdom. When the Roman warriors closed in 
upon him in an encircling move, his horse restricted his movement, so 
he dismounted and thrust his sword into his enemies. Then he saw 
one of them approaching his horse so as to mount it. He did not 
want this impure disbeliever on his horse's back, so he thrust his 
sword into it and killed it. 


He immediately broke through the encircled Roman warriors 
like a hurricane and recited these vehement lines of poetry : 


How wonderful Paradise is. 

I can see it approaching with its sweet and cool drink. 
The time for the punishment of the Romans is 
drawing near. 

Those unbelievers are not related to us in blood. 

I must fight the Romans whenever I see one of their 
warriors. 


The Roman soldiers were stunned by this warrior who fought 
like a full-armored army. Confounded by his fearlessness, they 
_closed in upon him in a way that left him no escape, for they were 
determined to slay him. Instantly, they struck with their swords and 
cut off his right hand. Swiftly he caught the standard with his left 
hand before it reached the ground. When they struck off his left 
hand, he caught the standard with his upperarms. At the moment, 
the only thing that really mattered to him was not to let the standard 


of the Prophet (PBUH) touch the ground as long as he was alive. 
Although his pure body was struck down, his upperarm still hugged 
the standard. The sounds of its fluttering seemed to have 
summoned ~Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah, who darted swiftly and 


gripped it then galloped towards his great destiny! 


* * * 


Thus, Ja‘far died an honorable death. He met Allah, the Most 
Great, the Most High, enveloped in self-sacrifice and heroism. 


When Allah the All-Knower, the All-Aware, inspired His 
Prophet (PBUH) with the outcome of the battle and Ja‘far's 
martyrdom, his tears flowed ashe placed his spirit in Allah's 
hands. Then he went to his late cousin's house and called his 
children. He hugged and kissed them while his tears flowed. Then he 
went back to his meeting surrounded by the Companions. Hassaan 
Ibn Thaabit, the poet laureate of Islam, lamented the death of Ja‘afar 
and his Companions saying: 


At daybreak a man of a blessed nature and graceful face 
Commanded the believers to death. 

His face was as bright as the moon. 

He was a proud man who descended from Al Haashim. 
He was a valiant man who rushed to help the 

oppressed. 

He fought until he was martyred 

And his reward was Paradise where there are lush 
green gardens. 

Jafar was loyal and obedient to Muhammad. 

If Islam lost one of Al-Haashim, 

There are still honorable and pious men of them 

Who are the support and pride of Islam. 


After Hassaan finished reciting his poem, Ka*b Ibn Maalik 
recited: 


219 


Iam griefstricken over the group 

Who were struck down in succession in the Battle of 
Mu'tah. 

They strived and fought fiercely and didn’t turn their 
back. 

Allah sent His blessings on them 

For they were pious and loyal men. 

Allah made the heavy rains water their bone. 

They stood firm before death in Mu'tah 

in obedience to Allah 

And for fear of His punishment. 

They were guided by Ja‘far's flag. He was the best 
Commander. 

He broke through the line of the enemy 
and was struck down 

Owing to the fierce and ruthless fight. 

Instantly, the bright moon darkened 

And the sun eclipsed to lament his death. 


* * * 


At the end, all the poor wept bitterly over the loss of their 
father, for Ja‘afar (May Allah be pleased with him) was the "father of 
the poor". Abu Hurairah said, "The most generous man towards the 
poor was Ja‘afar Ibn Abi Taalib." Indeed, when he was about to die, 
he wanted to be the most generous, self-denying and devoted martyr. 
*Abd Allah Ibn “Umar said, "I was with Ja’ far in the Battle of Mu'tah 
and we looked around for him. We found that the enemy had 
sprayed his body with more than ninety stabs and strikes!" 


But those killers did not scratch his invulnerable spirit. No, 
their swords and spears were the bridge which this glorious martyr 
crossed to be near Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most High. He was 
raised to a high station in heaven. His worn-out body was covered 
all over with the medals of war, namely, the wounds. Now, let us 
hear what the Prophet (PBUH) said about him: "I have seen him in 
Paradise. His head and wings — upper arms — were covered with 
blood!” 


220 


(21) 
“ABD ALLAH IBN RAWAAHAH 
O My Soul, Death Is Inevitable, So It Is Better 
for You to Be Martyred 


When the Prophet (PBUH) met secretly with Al-Madiinah's 
delegation on the outskirts of Makkah away from the disbelievers of 
the Quraish, twelve representatives of the Angaar took an oath of 
allegiance in the first Pledge of “Aqabah. ‘Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah 
was one of those representatives who ushered Islam to Al-Madiinah 
and who paved the way for the Hijrah, which was considered an 
excellent springboard for Allah's religion, Islam. “Abd Allah was also 
one of the great 73 of the Ansaar who gave the Prophet (PBUH) the 
Second Pledge of ‘Aqabah in the following year. After the Prophet 
(PBUH) and his Companions emigrated and settled in Al-Madiinah, 
“Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah was the most active Muslim of the Ansaar 
who strived to support the thriving religion. He was also the most 
alert Muslim to the plots of “Abd Allah Ibn Ubaiy whom the people 
of Al-Madiinah were about to crown King before the Muslims arrived. 
He never got over the bitterness he felt for losing the chance of his 
lifetime to become a king. Therefore, he used his craftiness to weave 
deceitful plots against Islam, while *Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah kept 
on tracing and detecting this craftiness with remarkable insight that 
frustrated most of Ibn Ubaiy's maneuvers and plots. 


Ibn Rawaahah (May Allah be pleased with him) was a scribe at 
a time in which writing was not prevalent. He was a poet. His 
poetry flowed with admirable fluency and strength. Ever since his 
Islam he devoted his poetic genius to its service. The Prophet 
(PBUH) always admired his poetry, asking him to recite more of it. 
One day, as he was sitting among his Companions, ~Abd Allah Ibn 
Rawaahah joined them, so the Prophet (PBUH) asked him, "How 
do you compose a poem?" ‘Abd Allah answered, "First I think about 
its subject matter, then I recite." He immediately recited: 


221 


O the good descendants of Al Haashim 

Allah raised you to a high station 

Of which you are worthy above all mankind. 

My intuition made me realize at once 

Your excelling nature, 

Contrary to the disbelievers’ belief in you. 

If you asked some of them for support and help, 
They would turn you down. 

May Allah establish the good that descends 

On you firmly 

And bestow victory upon you as He did to Muusaa. 


The Prophet (PBUH) was elated and said, "I hope that Allah 
will make your feet firm, too." When the Prophet was 
circumambulating the Ka‘bah in the compensatory “Umrah, Ibn 
Rawaahah recited to him: 


Were it not for Allah, we would not have been 
Guided to the Right path nor charitable 

Nor able to perform our prayers. 

So descend, peace of mind and reassurance, 
On us and establish our feet firmly 

When we meet our enemy 

In combat. If our oppressors tried to spread 
Affliction and trial, unrest, among us 

We will not give them way. 


Muslims reiterated his graceful lines. The active poet was 
saddened when the glorious verse descended saying: <And for the 
poets, only the erring people follow them > (26:224). But soon he 
was contented to hear another verse saying: <Except those who 
believe and do deeds of righteousness, and remember GOD 
frequently, and defend themselves after being oppressed > (26 : 227). 


* * + 


222 


When Islam rose up in arms in self-defense, Ibn Rawaahah saw 
service in all the battles: Badr, Uhud, Al-Khandaq, Al Hudaibiyyah, 
and Khaibar. His perpetual slogan was these lines of poetry: "O my 
soul, death is inevitable, so it is better for you to be martyred.” 


He shouted at the disbelievers in every battle, "O disbelievers, 
get out of my way. My Prophet (PBUH) has all the excellent 
qualities." 


The Battle of Mu'tah started, and, as we have mentioned, he 
was the third of the Commanders after Zaid and Ja‘far. Ibn 
Rawaahah (May Allah be pleased with him) stood there as the army 
was about to leave Al- Madiinah and recited: 


I truly ask the Most Beneficient's forgiveness 
and a mortal stroke of a sword 
that will strike me down 
foaming or a mortal stab 
with a spear by a stubborn disbeliever 
that will make my liver and intestine 
show out of my body. So that 
when people pass by my grave, 
they will say : By Allah, you are 
the most righteous warrior. 


Indeed, a stroke or a stab that would convey him into the world 
of rewarded martyrs was his utmost wish. The army marched 
towards Mu'tah. When the Muslims saw their enemies, they 
estimated them at 200,000, for they saw endless waves of warriors. 
The Muslims glanced back at their small group and were stunned. 
Some of them suggested, “Let us send a message to the Prophet 
(PBUH) to tell him of the enormity of the enemy that surpassed all 
our expectations so he will either order us to wait for reinforcements 
or to pierce through the enemy lines.” 


223 


However, Ibn Rawaahah stood amidst the lines of the army and 
said: "O my people, by Allah, we do not fight our enemies with 
numbers, strength or equipment, but rather with this religion which 
Allah has honored us with. So go right ahead: it is either one of two 
equally good options, victory or martyrdom." The Muslims, who 
were lesser in number and greater in faith, cried out, "By Allah, you 
spoke the truth." The smaller army broke through the mighty host of 
200,000 warriors in terrible and cruel fighting. 


* * + 


As we have mentioned, both armies met in fierce combat. The 
first commander, Zaid Ibn Haarithah, was struck down, he winning 
glorious martyrdom. The second in command was Ja‘far Ibn Abi 
Taalib, who was overjoyed to be martyred. “Abd Allah took over the 
command and grabbed the standard from Ja‘far's failing upper arms. 
The fight reached the peak of ferocity. The smaller army was 
indistinct amidst the waves of the mighty hosts of Heraclius. 


When Ibn Rawaahah was a soldier, he attacked heedlessly and 
confidently. But now the command placed great responsibilities for 
the army's safety on his shoulders. It seemed that for a moment he 
was overtaken by hesitation and dread, yet he instantly shook off 
those apprehensions, summoned his innate fearlessness and cried 
out, "O my soul, you look as if you were afraid to cross the way that 
leads to Paradise. O my soul, I took an oath to fight. O my soul, 
death is inevitable, so you had better be martyred. Now I will 
experience the inevitability of death. What you have cared for so 
long is finally yours. So go ahead, for if you follow these two heroes, 
you will be guided to the way of Paradise." He meant the two heroes 
who had preceded him in martyrdom, Zaid and Ja*far. 


He darted into the Roman armies, fiercely and ruthlessly. Were 
it not for a previous ordainment from Allah that he was to be 
martyred on that day, he would have annihilated the fighting hosts. 
But destiny called and he was martyred. His body was struck 
down, yet his pure, valiant spirit was raised to the heavens. His 


224 


most precious wish finally came true, so that "When people pass by 
my grave, they will say: By Allah you are the most righteous warrior." 


* % * 


The fierce attack in Al-Balqaa* in Syria went on. Back in Al- 
Madiinah the Prophet (PBUH) was talking peacefully and 
contentedly with his Companions when he suddenly stopped talking. 
He closed his eyes a little, then opened them. A gleam flashed from 
them, yet it was tinged with sadness and compassion. He looked 
around sadly and said, "Zaid took the standard and fought until he 
was martyred." He was silent for a while, then continued "Ja‘far 
grasped it and fought until he was marytred. Then ‘Abd Allah Ibn 
Rawaahah grasped it and fought until he was martyred." He was 
silent for a while, then his eyes sparkled with elation, tranquility, 
longing, and joy as he said, "They were all raised to Paradise." 


What a glorious journey it must have been! What a happy 
succession! They all marched to conquer, they all were raised up to 
Paradise. The best salute to immortalize their memory rests in the 
Prophet's words: "They were raised up to await me in Paradise." 


225 


(22) 
KHAALID IBN AL-WALIID 
A Sleepless Man Who Will Not Let Anyone Sleep 


His story is a rather perplexing one. He was the deadly enemy 
of Muslims in the Battle of Uhud and the deadly enemy of the 
enemies of Islam in the remaining Muslim battles. 


I feel at a loss concerning where to begin and what to begin 
with. He himself hardly believed that his life had really begun until 
that day on which he shook hands with the Prophet as a sign of his 
allegiance to him. If he could have ruled out all the years, even the 
days that preceeded that day, he would not have thought twice. 


Let us then begin with that part of his life which he himself 
loved most. Let us begin from that glorious moment when his heart 
was affected by Allah and his spirit was blessed by the Most 
Merciful. Thus, it overflowed with devotion to His religion, His 
Prophet and to a memorable martyrdom in the way of the truth. This 
martyrdom enabled him to erase the burdens of his advocation of 
falsehood in the past. 


+ * * 


One day, he sat alone in deep thought concerning that new 
religion that was gaining momentum and gaining ground every day. 
He wished that Allah, the All-Knower of what is hidden and unseen, 
would guide him to the right path. His blessed heart was revived by 
the glad tidings of certainty. Therefore, he said to himself, "By Allah, 
it is crystal clear now. This man is indeed a Prophet, so how long 
shall I procrastinate. By Allah, I will go and submit myself to Islam." 


Now, let us hear him (May Allah be pleased with him) narrate 
his blessed visit to the Prophet (PBUH) and his journey from Makkah 
to Al-Madiinah to join the ranks of the believers: I hoped to find an 
escort, and I ran into ‘Uthmaan Ibn Talhah and when I told him 
about my intention, he agreed to escort me. We traveled shortly 


226 


before daybreak and as we reached the plain, we ran into ‘Amr Ibn 
Al-* Aas. 


After we had exchanged greetings, he asked us about our 
destination, and when we told him, it turned out that he himself 
was going to the same place to submit himself to Islam. The three of 
us arrived at Al-Madiinah on the first day of Safar in the eighth year. 
As soon as I laid my eyes on the Prophet, I said, "Peace be upon the 
Prophet," so he greeted me with a bright face. Immediately, I 
submitted myself to Islam and bore witness to the truth. Finally, the 
Prophet (PBUH) said, "I knew that you have an open mind and I 
prayed that it would lead you to safety.” I took my oath of allegiance 
to the Prophet then asked him, "Please ask Allah's forgiveness for me 
for all the wrongdoings I have committed to hinder men from the path 
of Allah." The Prophet said, "Islam erases all the wrongdoings 
committed before it." Yet I pleaded with him, "Please pray for me." 
Finally, he supplicated Allah, "O Allah, forgive Khaalid for all the 
wrongdoings he committed before he embraced Islam." Then ‘Amr 
Ibn Al--Aag and “Uthmaan Ibn Talhah stepped forward and 
submitted themselves to Islam and gave their oath of allegiance to the 
Prophet. 


Notice these words "Please ask Allah's forgiveness for me for all 
the wrongdoings I have committed in the past to hinder men from the 
path of Allah.” Now, whoever has the perception and insight to read 
between the lines will find the true meaning of these words of 
Khaalid, who became the sword of Allah and the hero of Islam. 


When we come across various incidents in the course of his life 
story, these words are our key to understanding and elucidation. 


For the time being, let us accompany Khaalid, who had just 
embraced Islam, and watch the Quraish's great warrior who had 
always held the reins of leadership. Let us see the subtlest of Arabs 
in the art of attack and retreat as he turned his back on the idols of 
his ancestors and the glory of his people, and welcomed, along with 


227 


the Prophet and the Muslims, the advent of a new world that Allah 
had destined to rise under the standard of Muhammad and the 


slogan of monotheism. 


Let us hear the Muslim Khaalid's impressive story. To start 
with, do you recall the story of the three martyrs of the Battle of 
Mu'tah ? They were Zaid Ibn Haarithah, Ja‘far Ibn Abi Taalib and 
‘Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah. They were the heroes of the Battle of 
Mu'tah in Syria, in which the Romans mobilized 200,000 warriors. 
Nevertheless, the Muslims achieved unprecedented victory. 


Do you recall the glorious, sad words with which the Prophet 
announced the sad news of the death of the three commanders of the 
battle? "Zaid Ibn Haarithah took the standard and fought holding it 
until he died as a martyr; then Ja‘far took it and fought clinging to it 
until he won martyrdom; and finally, “Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah 
gripped it and held it fast until he won martyrdom." 


This is only part of the Prophet's speech, which I have written 
before, but now I find it appropriate to write the rest of the story: 
"Then it was gripped by a sword of the swords of Allah and he 
fought until he achieved victory." 


"Who was that hero? He was Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid, who 
threw himself into the battlefield as if he were an ordinary soldier 
under the three commanders whom the Prophet assigned. The first 
commander was Zaid Ibn Haarithah, the second was Ja*far Ibn Abi 
Taalib, and the third was ~Abd Allah Ibn Rawaahah. They won 
martyrdom in the same order on the vicious battlefield. 


After the last commander had won martyrdom, Thaabit Ibn 
Aqram took the standard with his right hand and raised it high 
amidst the Muslim army. His purpose was to stop any potential 
disarray inside the lines. Thaabit then carried the standard and 
hastened towards Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid and said, " Take the 
standard, Abu Sulaimaan." Khaalid thought that he did not deserve 


to take it since he had newly embraced Islam. He had no right to 
preside over an army that included the Angaar and Muhaajiruun who 
had preceded him in embracing Islam. 


These qualities of decorum, modesty, and gratitude were 
becoming of Khaalid's worthiness. He said, "I will not dare to hold it. 
Go on, hold it, for you deserve it better than me. First, you are older. 
Second, you witnessed the Battle of Bad." Thaabit answered, "Come 
on, take it, you know the art of fighting far better than me. By Allah, 
I only held it to give it to you." Then he called on the Muslims, "Do 
you vote for Khaalid's command?" They readily answered, “Yes, we 
do!" 


At that moment, the great warrior mounted his horse and thrust 
the standard forward with his right hand as if he were knocking on 
closed doors that had been closed for too long and whose time had 
finally come to be flung wide open. So this act was to lead the hero 
to a long but passable road on which he would leap during the 
Prophet's life and after his death until destiny brought his ingenuity 
to its inevitable end. 


Although Khaalid was in charge of the army command, hardly 
any military expertise could change the already determined outcome 
of the battle, turning defeat into victory or turning victory into defeat. 
The only thing that a genius could manage to do was to prevent more 
casualties or damage in the Muslim army from occurring and end 
the battle with the remainder of the army intact. Sometimes a great 
commander must resort to that kind of preventive retreat measure 
that will prevent the annihilation of the rest of his striking force on 
the battlefield. However, such a retreat was potentially impossible, 
yet if the saying, "Nothing stands in the way of a fearless heart" is 
true, there was no one more fearless and ingenious than Khaalid. 


Instantly, The Sword of Allah flung himself into the vast 
battlefield. His eyes were as sharp as a hawk's. His mind worked 
quickly, turning over all the potentialities in his mind. While the 
fierce fight raged, Khaalid quickly split his army into groups, with 
each assigned a certain task. He used his incredible expertise 


and outstanding craftiness to open a wide space within the Roman 
army through which the whole Muslim army retreated intact. This 
narrow escape was credited to the ingenuity of a Muslim hero. In this 
battle, the Prophet gave Khaalid the great epithet "The Sword of 
Allah". 


Shortly thereafter, the Quraish violated their treaty with the 
Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslims marched under Khaalid's 
command to conquer Makkah. The Prophet assigned the command 
of the right flank of the army to Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid. 


Khaalid entered Makkah as one of the commanders of the 
Muslim army and the Muslim nation. He recalled his youth when he 
galloped across its plains and mountains as one of the commanders 
of the army of paganism and polytheism. Khaalid stood there 
recollecting his childhood days playing on its wonderful pastures and 
his youthful memories of its wild entertainment. These memories of 
the past weighed down on him, and he was filled with remorse for 
his wasted life in which he worshipped inanimate and helpless idols. 


But before he bit the tips of his fingers in remorse, he was 
overpowered by the magnificence and spell of this scene of the 
glorious light that approached Makkah and swept away all that 
came before it. The astounding scene of the weak and oppressed 
people, on whose bodies the marks of torture and horror still showed, 
was magnificent as they returned to the land they had been unjustly 
driven out of. Only this time, they returned on horseback under the 
fluttering standard of Islam. Their whispers at Daar Al-Arqam's 
house yesterday turned today into loud and glorious shouts of 
"Allahu akbar (Allah is the Greatest)", that shook Makkah and the 
victorious cry "There is no god but Allah", with which the entire 
universe seemed to be celebrating a feast day. 


How did this miracle come about? What is the explanation of 
what had happened? Simply, there was no logical or rational 


230 


explanation whatsoever, but the power of the verse that the 
victorious marching soldiers repeated with their "There is no god but 
Allah" and "Allahu akbar" as they looked with joy at one another 
and said, < (It is ) a Promise of Allah, and Allah fails not in His 
Promise > (30:6). 


Then Khaalid raised his head and watched in reverence, joy 
and satisfaction as the standard of Islam fluttered on the horizon. 
He said to himself, "Indeed, it is a promise of Allah and Allah 
fails not in His promise." Then he bent his head in gratitude and 
thanks for Allah's blessing that had guided him to Islam and made 
him one of thoee who would usher Islam into Makkah rather than one 
of those who would be spurred by this conquest to submit themselves 
to Islam. 


Khaalid was always near the Prophet. He devoted his excellent 
abilities to the service of the religion he firmly believed in and devoted 
his life to. After the glorious Prophet had died and Abu Bakr became 
the caliph, the sly and treacherous cyclone of those who apostatized 
from Islam shrouded the new religion with its deafening roar and 
devastating outbreak. Abu Bakr, quickly chose the hero of the 
battlefields and man of the hour, namely Abu Sulaimaan, The Sword 
of Allah, Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid. It is true that Abu Bakr himself 
was at the head of the first army that fought against the apostates; 
nevertheless, he saved Khaalid for the decisive day and Khaalid was 
truly the mastermind and inspired hero of the last crucial battle that 
was considered the most dangerous of all the apostasy battles. 


* + * 


When the apostate armies were taking measures to perfect their 
large conspiracy, the great Caliph Abu Bakr insisted on taking the 
lead of the Muslim army. The leaders of the Companions tried 
desperately to persuade him not to, yet his decision was final. 
Perhaps he meant to give the cause for which he mobilized and rallied 
this army a special importance, tinged with sanctity. He could not 


231 


achieve his aim except by his actual participation in the deadly battle 
and his direct command of some or all of the Muslim troops. It was a 
battle between the power of belief against the power of apostasy 
and darkness. 


The outbreak of apostasy posed serious threats, inspite of the 
fact that it started as an accidental insubordination. Soon, the 
opportunists and the malicious enemies of Islam, whether from the 
Arab tribes or from across the borders where the power 
of Romans and Persians perched, seized their last opportunity to 
hinder the sweeping tide of Islam. Therefore, they instigated mutiny 
and chaos from behind the scenes. 


Unfortunately, mutiny flowed like an electric current through 
the Arab tribes, like Asad, Ghatfaan, “Abs, Tii, Dhubyaan, then Bani 
“Aamar, Hawaazin, Sulaim and Bani Tamiim. Hardly had the 
skirmishes started with limited numbers of soldiers than they were 
reinforced with enormous armies, often of thousands of warriors. 
The people of Bahrain, Oman and Al-Mahrah responded to this 
horrible plot. 


Suddenly, Islam was facing a dangerous predicament, and the 
apostate enemy closed in upon the believers. But Abu Bakr was 
ready for them. He mobilized the Muslim armies and marched to 
where the armies of Bani “Abs, Bani Murah and Bani Dhubyaan 
gathered. 


The battle started and went on for a long time before the 
Muslims achieved a great victory. No sooner had the victorious 
Muslim army reached Al-Madiinah than the caliph sent it on another 
expedition. News spread that the armies of the apostates were 
increasing in number and weapons by the hour. 


Abu Bakr marched at the head of the second army, only this 
time, the prominent Companions lost their patience and clung to their 
opinion that the caliph should remain in Al-Madiinah. Accordingly, 
Imam *Aliy stood in Abu Bakr's way as he was marching at the head 
of the army and held the reins of his she camel and asked, "Where to, 


232 


Caliph of the Prophet? I will tell you the same words that the 
Prophet told you in the Battle of Uhud: Sheathe your sword, Abu 
Bakr, and don't expose us to such a tragic loss at this critical time." 


The caliph had to comply with this consensus. Therefore, he 
split the army into eleven divisions and assigned a certain role for 
each one. Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid would be the commander over a 
large division. When the caliph gave every commander his standard, 
he addressed Khaalid saying, "I heard the Prophet say, 'Khaalid is 
truly an excellent slave of Allah and a brother of the same tribe. He 
is a sword of Allah unsheathed against disbelievers and hypocrites.” 


* * + 


Khaalid and his army fought one battle after another and 
achieved one victory after another until they reached the crucial 
battle. 


It was in the Battle of Al-Yamaamah that Bani Haniifah and 
their allies from the Arab tribes organized one of the most dangerous 
armies of the apostasy, led by Musailamah the Liar. A number of 
Muslim forces tried to defeat Musailamah’s army but failed. Finally 
the caliph ordered Khaalid to march to where Bani Haniifah was 
camped. 


No sooner had Musailamah heard that Khaalid was on his way 
to fight him than he reorganized his army, turning it into a 
devastating and horrible enemy machine. Both armies met in fierce 
combat. When you read the history of the Prophet (PBUH) a 
perplexing awe will take hold of you, for you will find yourself 
watching a battle that resembles our modern battles in its atrocity 
and horrors, though it differs in weapons and tactics. 


Khaalid's army stopped at a sand dune that overlooked Al- 
Yamaamah. At the same time, Musailamah marched haughtily and 


233 


with great might followed by endless waves of his soldiers. Khaalid 
assigned the brigades and standard to the commanders of his army. 
As the two armies clashed in a terrible, large-scale, devastating war, 
the Muslim martyrs fell one by one like roses in a garden on which a 
stubborn tempest blew! Immediately Khaalid realized that the 
enemy was about to win the battle, so he galloped up a nearby hill 
and surveyed the battlefield. He realized that his soldiers morale 
was waning under the pressure of the blitz of Musailamah's army. 


Instantly, he decided to trigger a new feeling of responsibility 
inside the Muslim army, so he summoned the flanks and reorganized 
their positions on the battlefield. He cried out victoriously, "Fight 
together in your own groups and let us see who will surpass the other 
and win the field." They all obeyed and reorganized themselves in 
their own groups. Thus, the Muhaajiruun fought under their 
standard, the Ansaar fought under theirs, and every group fought 
under its standard. It became fairly easy to determine where defect 
came from. As a result, the Muslims were charged with admirable 
enthusiasm, firmness, and determination. 


Every now and then, Khaalid was careful to cry out, "Allahu 
akbar" and "There is no god but Allah." He ordered his army in such 
a way that he turned the swords of his men into an inevitable victory 
that no one could escape. It was striking that, in a few minutes, the 
Muslim army turned the tables on Musailamah's army. Musailamah's 
soldiers fell in tens of hundreds and thousands like flies that were 
suffocated by the deadly spray of a pesticide. Khaalid ordered his 
soldiers with a kind of enthusiasm that flowed into them like an 
electric current. This was a manifestation of his striking genius. This 
was the manner in which the most decisive and fierce battle of 
apostasy was conducted. In the end, Musailamah was slain and the 
bodies of his men were scattered on the battlefield. Finally, the 
standard of the liar imposter was buried forever . 


* * * 


On hearing the good news, the caliph offered the Prayer of 


234 


Thanksgiving to Allah the Great and Most High for bestowing victory 
on the hands of this hero. 


Abu Bakr had enough discernment and insight to realize the 
danger of the evil powers that perched on the borders, threatening the 
promising future of Islam and Muslims. These evil powers were the 
Persians in Iraq and the Romans in Syria. These two dwindling 
empires that clung tenaciously to the distorted remnant of their past 
glory were not only afflicting the people of Iraq and Syria with 
horrible torment, but also manipulating them. Notwithstanding the 
fact that the majority populations were Arabs, they instigated them 
to fight Muslim Arabs who carried the standard of the new religion 
which sought to pull down the vestiges of the ancient world and 
eradicate the decay and corruption in which it was steeped. The 
great and blessed caliph sent his orders to Khaalid to march towards 
Iraq, so the hero did so. 


I wish that I were given more space to follow up in detail the 
proceedings of his magnificent victory. 


Upon arriving in Iraq, the first thing that Khaalid did was to 
dispatch messages to every governor and deputy who ruled the 
provinces and cities of Iraq in the name of the emperor. These 
messages were as follows: In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficient, 
the Most Merciful. Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid sends this message to the 
satraps of Persia. Peace will be upon him who follows the guidance. 
All praises and thanks be to Allah Who dispersed your power and 
thwarted your deceitful plots. On the one hand, he who performs our 
prayers directing his face to our Qiblah to face the Sacred Mosque in 
Makkah and eats our slaughtered animals is a Muslim. He has the 
same rights and duties that we have. On the other hand, if you do 
not want to embrace Islam, then as soon as you receive my message, 
send over the jizyah (tax levied upon non-Muslim people who are 
under the protection of a Muslim government) and I give you my 
word that I will respect and honor this covenant. But if you do not 
agree to either choice, then, by Allah, I will send to you people who 
‘rave death as much as you crave life. 


235 


Khaalid's scouts whom he planted everywhere warned him 
against the enormity of the armies that were organized by the 
commanders of Persia in Iraq. As usual, Khaalid did not waste much 
time. Therefore, he flung his soldiers against the falsehood of 
disbelief so as to devastate it. 


Victory followed him wherever he went, from Al-Ubullah, to 
As-Sadiir, An-Najaf, Al-Hiirah, Al-Anbaar then Al-Kaadhimiyah. 
There was one victory procession after another. The glad tidings of 
Khaalid's arrival blew like a fresh breeze wherever he went to usher in 
Islam. The weak and oppressed people found sanctuary in the new 
religion that saved them from the occupation and oppression of the 
Persians. 


It was impressive that Khaalid's first order to his troops was, 
"Do not attack or hurt the peasants. Leave them to work at peace 
unless some of them attack you. Only then, I permit you to defend 
yourselves." 


He marched on with his victorious army, swept his enemies, 
and cut through their ranks like a knife cutting through melting butter. 
The Aadhaan resounded everywhere. I wonder if it had reached the 
Romans in Syria? Did they realize that cries of "Allah is the 
Greatest" signaled the end of their deteriorating civilizations? 
Indeed, they must have heard. In fact, the Aadhaan cast terror into 
them, yet in a desperate attempt to recapture the phantom of their 
empire, they decided heedlessly to fight a battle of despair and 
perdition. 


Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq mobilized his armies and chose a group 
of his prominent commanders such as Abu “Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah, 
“Amr Ibn Al-\Aas, Yaziid Ibn Abi Sufyaan and Mu‘aawiyah Ibn Abi 
Sufyaan to lead them. 


When the Roman emperor heard the news of the mobilization of 
these armies, he advised his ministers and commanders to make 


236 


peace with the Muslims to avoid inevitable defeat. However, his 
ministers and commanders insisted on fighting and maintained, "By 
our Lord, we will make Abu Bakr's hair stand on end before his 
horses breed in our land." Consequently, they mobilized an army 
estimated at 240,000 warriors. 


The Muslim commanders dispatched this terrifying news to 
Abu Bakr, who pledged, "By Allah, I will rid them of their doubts 
through Khaalid." Thus, the antidote of their evil suggestions of 
mutiny, aggression, and disbelief, namely Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid, was 
ordered to go on an expedition to Syria, where he was to command 
the Muslim armies. 


Khaalid promptly acted upon his orders and left Iraq under Al- 
Muthannaa Ibn Haarithah's supervision and marched with his troops 
until they reached the Muslim headquarters in Syria. His ingenuity 
enabled him to organize the Muslim armies and coordinate their 
different positions in no time. Shortly before the outbreak of war, he 
addressed his warriors after he had praised and thanked Allah, 
saying, "This is Allah's day. On this day, we must not give way to 
pride not let injustice overrule. I advise you to purify your jihaad 
and your deeds for Allah. Let us take turns in command. Let each 
and everyone of us take over the command for a day." 


"This is Allah's day." What a wonderful onset! "We must not 
give way to pride nor let injustice overrule." This sentence is even 
more graceful, adequate, and awesome. On the one hand, the great 
leader was not lacking in self-denial and cleverness, for inspite of the 
fact that the caliph had assigned the command of the army to him, he 
did not want to give Satan a chance to whisper in the breasts of his 
soldiers. Therefore, he relinquished his absolute hold on the army to 
every soldier in the ranks even though he was already the 
commander. Thus, the commander of the army rotated from day to 
day. 


The enormous and well-equipped Roman army was really 
terrifying. On the other hand, the Roman commander realized that 
time was in the Muslims’ favor, for they were given to protracted 


237 


battles which would guarantee their victory. Therefore, he decided 
to mobilize all their troops for a quick battle to finish off the Arabs 
once and for all. 


Undoubtedly the courageous Muslims, on that day, were 
gripped by fear and anxiety, yet in such predicaments they always 
resorted to their faith, in which they found hope and victory. 
Notwithstanding the might of the Roman armies, the experienced Abu 
Bakr had firm belief in Khaalid's abilities; therefore he said, 
"Khaalid is the man for it. By Allah, I will rid them of their doubts 
with Khaalid." 


Let the Romans parade their terrifying, enormous forces, for the 
Muslims had the antidote. Ibn Al-Waliid mobilized and rallied his 
army, then divided it into brigades. He laid out a new plan for attack 
and defense that adhered to the Roman war strategy and tactics with 
which he was well-acquainted from his past experience with the 
Persians. He was ready for all possibilities. Strangely enough, the 
battle raged exactly as he had imagined it would, step by step and 
one fight after another. If he had actually counted the number of 
strokes of swords, he would not have been much more accurate. 
Before the two armies clashed, he was worried about the possibility 
that some of the soldiers, especially those who had newly embraced 
Islam, might flee upon seeing the terrifying and enormous Roman 
army. 


Khaalid believed that the ingenuity of victory and firmness were 
one and the same. He believed that the Muslim army could not 
afford the loss of even one of its soldiers, for it was enough to spread 
malignant panic and havoc inside the army, which was something 
that even the entire Roman army could not succeed in doing. In 
consequence, he was extremely firm concerning anyone who deserted 
his post and weapon and ran away. In the Battle of Yarmuuk, in 
particular, and afterwards, his troops took their positions. He 
called the Muslim women and, for the first time, gave them swords. 
He ordered them to stand at the rear of the lines to "Kill anyone who 
flees." It was the magic touch of a mastermind. 


238 


Shortly before the battle erupted, the Roman commander asked 
Khaalid to show himself, for he wanted a few words with him. 
Khaalid rode towards him, then they galloped to the area that 
separated the two armies. Mahan, the Roman commander, 
addressed Khaalid saying, "We know that nothing but weariness and 
hunger made you leave your country and go on this expedition. If you 
wish, we shall give ten dinars, clothes, and food to every one of you, 
on one condition, that you return to your country and next year we 
will do the same." 


Khaalid gnashed his teeth, as he was provoked by his flagrant 
lack of manners, yet he repressed himself and answered confidently, 
"We didn't leave our country out of hunger as you said, but we heard 
that Roman blood is very delicious and tasty, so we have decided to 
quench our thirst with it." 


Swiftly, the hero rode back to the ranks of his army and raised 
the Muslim standard to the full length of his arm, then he launched 
the attack. 


Allahu akbar! Let the breeze of Paradise blow! 


At once, his army was like a missile as it charged into the 
battlefield. They met in an extraordinary, monstrous, and deadly 
combat. The Romans rushed into the battlefield with an enormous 
number, yet they found that their foes were not an easy prey. The 
self-sacrifice and firmness that the Muslims displayed on that day 
were impressive. 


In the first place, one of the Muslim soldiers rushed to Abu 
“Ubaidah Ibn Al-jarraah (May Allah be pleased with him) during the 
battle and said, “I have set my mind on martyrdom. Do you want me 
to take a message to the Prophet (PBUH) when I meet him?" Abu 
“Ubaidah answered, "Yes, tell him we have indeed found true what 
our Lord had promised us." Immediately, the man darted like an 
arrow into the horrors of the battlefield. He craved death; therefore, 
he fought fiercely with one sword while thousands of swords were 
thrusted into him until he won martyrdom. 


239 


Secondly, “I[kramah Ibn Abu Jahl — yes, he was the son of the 
infamous Abu Jahl. He called out to the Muslims when the Romans 
were killing anyone who came within the sweep of their swords and 
said, "I fought against the Prophet before Allah guided me to Islam, 
so how can I possibly be afraid of fighting Allah's enemy after I 
submitted myself to Islam?" 


Then he cried out, "Who gives me the pledge to death?" He was 
given the pledge to death by a group of Muslims. Then they broke 
through the enemy lines. They preferred martyrdom to victory. Allah 
accepted the bargain they had concluded through their pledge and 
they won martyrdom. 


Thirdly, other Muslims were badly wounded and water was 
brought so that they might quench their thirst, yet when it was offered 
to the first one, he pointed to his brother who was lying next to him 
more seriously wounded and who was more thirsty. Again, when 
this brother was offered water, he in his turn pointed to his brother. 
Finally, the majority of them died thirsty after they had 
demonstrated an incredible example of self-denial and self-sacrifice. 
Indeed, the Battle of Al-Yarmuuk witnessed unprecedented and 
unmatched instances of self-sacrifice. 


Among these striking masterpieces of self-sacrifice exhibited by 
the determined will of the Muslims was the extraordinary portrait of 
Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid at the head of only 100 soldiers who flung 
themselves against 40,000 Romans. Khaalid kept calling out to his 
100 soldiers saying, "By Allah, the Romans seemed to have lost their 
patience and courage, therefore I pray to Allah to let you have the 
upper hand over them." 


How could 100 soldiers have the upper hand over 40,000? It 
is, indeed, incredible! Yet, were not the hearts of these 100 soldiers 
filled with faith in Allah the Most High, the Most Great? Were 
they not filled with faith in His trustworthy and honest Prophet 
(PBUH)? Were they not filled with faith in that cause which 
represents the most persistent vital issue in life? This cause 
represents piety and righteousness. And was not their Caliph Abu 


240 


Bakr As-Siddiiq (Allah be pleased with him) the man who, while his 
flags were raised above the whole world, sat there in Al-Madiinah, 
the new capital of the new world, milking with his own hands the 
ewes of widows and kneading with his own hands the bread of 
orphans? Was not their Commander Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid the 
antidote for the doubts of tyranny, arrogance, oppression, and 
transgression? Was not the Sword of Allah drawn against the powers 
of backwardness, decay, and disbelief? Were not all these portraits 
a depiction of truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth? 


So let the breeze of victory blow! Let it blow strong, mighty, 
and victorious! 


Khaalid's ingenuity impressed the Roman officers and 
commanders so much so that Jerjah, a Roman commander, asked 
Khaalid to show himself during a rest in the fighting. When they met, 
the Roman commander asked him, "Khaalid, tell me the truth and do 
not lie, for the freeman doesn't lie. Did Allah send down on your 
Prophet a heavenly sword and he gave it to you, so that it enables 
you to kill anyone who comes within its sweep?” Khaalid answered, 
"No." The man exclaimed, " Then why do they call you the Sword of 
Allah?" Khaalid explained, "Allah sent His Prophet to us. Some of 
us believed in him and others disbelieved in him. I was among the 
disbelievers until Allah guided my heart to Islam and to His Prophet 
(PBUH) and I gave him my allegiance. Therefore, the Prophet 
supplicated Allah for me and said, ‘You are the Sword of Allah." 
The Roman commander asked, “What do you invite people to?" 
Khaalid answered, "We invite people to monotheism and to Islam." 
He asked, "Does anyone who submits himself to Islam have the same 
reward as you?" Khaalid answered, " Yes, and even better." Jerjah 
exclaimed, "How, when you embraced Islam before he did?” 


Khaalid answered, "We lived with the Prophet and saw with 
our own eyes his signs and miracles. Now anyone who had the 
chance to see what we saw and hear what we heard was expected to 
submit himself to Islam sooner or later. As for you who did not see 


241 


or hear him, if despite this you believe in him and in the unseen, you 
will find better and greater reward if you purify your conscience and 
intentions to Allah." 


The Roman commander cried out as he urged his horse closer to 
Khaalid and stood next to him, "Please, Khaalid, teach me Islam!" 
He submitted himself to Islam and prayed two rak‘ahs. Soon, 
combat erupted and once again, the Roman Jerjah fought, but this 
time on the Muslim side until he won martyrdom. 


Now, let us watch closely how human greatness was 
manifested in one of its most remarkable scenes. The first version 
narrated by the historian said that while Khaalid was commanding 
the Muslim army in this bloody and crucial war and wresting victory 
out of the claws of the Romans with admirable master strokes, the 
new caliph, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, Commander of the Faithful, 
dispatched a message to him in which he saluted the Muslim army 
and announced the sad news of Abu Bakr's death (May Allah be 
pleased with him). Then he ordered Khaalid to give up his command 
to Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah. Khaalid read the message and 
supplicated Allah to have mercy on Abu Bakr and bestow His 
guidance on “Umar. Then he strictly ordered the messenger not to tell 
anyone about the purport of the message and not to leave his place or 
communicate with anyone. 


Then Khaalid resumed his command of the combat and 
concealed the news of Abu Bakr's death and ‘Umar's orders until 
they had achieved victory. Finally, the hour of victory came and the 
Romans were defeated. 


It was only then that the hero approached Abu “Ubaidah and 
saluted him. At first, Abu ~“Ubaidah thought that he did so in jest, 
yet he soon realized how serious and true this news was. Instantly, 
he kissed Khaalid between his eyes and praised his greatness. 


The second version of the same incident is that the message 
was sent to Abu*Ubaidah, who concealed the news from Khaalid 
until the burden of wat was over. Which of the two versions is 


authentic is not our concern here. The only thing that interests us 
here is Khaalid's conduct, which was superb in both versions. 


I cannot think of a situation in which Khaalid manifested more 
loyalty and sincerity than this one. It did not matter to him whether 
he was a commander or a soldier. Both ranks were one and the same 
to him as long as they enabled him to carry out his duties towards 
Allah Whom he believed in, the Prophet (PBUH) whom he gave 
allegiance to, and, finally, towards the religion which he embraced. 
This great self-control of Khaalid and of other Muslims was not 
possible without the help and guidance of the unique type of caliphs 
who were at the head of the Muslim nation at that time. These 
caliphs were Abu Bakr and “Umar. The mere mention of either name 
conjures up all the unique and great traits created in mankind. 


Notwithstanding the fact that Khaalid and “Umar were not 
exactly best friends, “Umar's decency, justice, and remarkable 
greatness were not in the least questioned by Khaalid. Hence, his 
decisions and judgments were not questioned. The unbiased 
conscience of the man who issued these orders reached the apex of 
piety, steadfastness, and veracity. 


* * * 


“Umar, the Commander of the Faithful, had nothing against 
Khaalid but his overburdening and sharp sword. 


He vented these reservations when he suggested to Abu Bakr 
that Khaalid should be dismissed after the death of Maalik Ibn 
Nuwairah. He said, "Khaalid's sword is overburdening." He meant 
that it was swift, sharp, and harsh. The Caliph As-Siddiiq said, “I 
would not sheathe what Allah had unsheathed against the 
disbelievers." 


Notice that ‘Umar did not say that Khaalid was overburdening 
but used "overburdening" to describe the sword rather than the man. 
Not only did these words manifest the elevated politeness of the 


243 


Commander of the Faithful but also his profound appreciation of 
Khaalid. : 


Khaalid was a man of war from head to toe. He dedicated his 
whole life before and after his Islam to becoming a shrewd and daring 
knight. Even his environment and the way he was brought up were 
devoted to that ultimate goal. 


Whenever he traveled back in time, he saw the wars he waged 
against the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions and the strokes of 
his sword that had slain believers and worshipers. Those memories 
agitated him and made him conscience - stricken. Therefore, his 
sword longed to devastate the pillars of disbelief to compensate for 
his wrongdoings in the past. 


I think you still remember what went on between Khaalid and 
the Prophet (PBUH) at the beginning of this chapter, particularly 
when Khaalid asked the Prophet, "Please ask Allah's forgiveness for 
me for all the wrongdoings I committed to hinder men from Allah's 
path.” You also remember that even when the Prophet told him that 
Islam erases all the wrongdoings committed before it, he pleaded 
with him until he finally promised him to ask Allah's forgiveness for 
him for all the mischief he had committed before he submitted himself 
to Islam. 


Surely when the sword is carried by such an extraordinary 
knight as Khaalid and thrust upon the commands of a conscience, 
revived by the warmth of purification, sacrifice, and absolute loyalty 
to a religion that was surrounded by conspiracy and animosity, it will 
be impossible for this sword to throw aside its strict principles or its 
spontaneous sharpness. 


For instance, when the Prophet (PBUH) sent him to some Arab 
tribes after the conquest of Makkah, he said to him, "I am sending you 
there not as a warrior, but as a Muslim who invites to the way of 
Allah." Unfortunately, his sword got the better of him and forced 
him into the role of the warrior, obliterating the role of the Muslim 
who invites to the way of Allah that the Prophet (PBUH) had 


244 


ordered him to follow. When the Prophet (PBUH) heard what 
Khaalid had done, he was stricken with anxiety and pain. Then he 
turned in the direction of the Qiblah and raised his hands in 
supplication and apology to Allah and said, "O Allah, I free myself 
from blame for what Khaalid has committed." Then he sent ~Aliy to 
give compensatory blood-money to the family of the deceased. 


Narrators said that Khaalid absolved himself from blame when 
he said that ~Abd Allah Ibn Hudhaafah As-Sahmii told him, "The 
Prophet has ordered you to attack them for their rejection of Islam." 


In spite of that, Khaalid possessed superhuman energy. He 
was overtaken by an irresistible urge to devastate the idolatry of the 
ancient world. If we watched him pulling down the ~Uzzaa idol 
which the Prophet (PBUH) ordered him to destroy, we would see 
that the resentment and wrath he showed while striking were so 
aggressive and violent that he did not seem to be striking at a mass 
of rock but at a whole army, cutting the throats of its soldiers and 
spreading death everywhere. For he kept striking with his right 
hand, then with his left hand, then with his foot. He yelled at the 
scattered rubble and dust , “"Uzzaa, I don't believe in you! Glory is 
not to be yours! I can see that Allah has humilitated you!" 


* + * 


We will always repeat the words of “Umar the Commander of 
the Faithful about Khaalid: "Women who give birth to men like 
Khaalid are extremely rare," as well as our earnest wish along with 
‘Umar that his sword would lose its rashness. 


On the day of his death, “Umar cried excessively. Later, people 
learned that his grief was not only caused by his personal loss, but 
also by the loss of his last chance to return the command to Khaalid 
now that people were no longer infatuated with him. The reasons 
behind his dismissal were now gone. Only this time, unfortunately, 
the man was gone too. 


Indeed, the great hero rushed to take his place in Paradise. For 


245 


it was about time he caught his breath, considering the fact that no 
one on earth had been more restless than he. It was really about time 
his exhausted body would sleep for a while, considering that he was 
described by his friends and enemies alike as "A sleepless man who 
would not let anyone sleep." 


If it were for him to decide, he would have chosen to live on 
until he had demolished all the decaying ruins of the ancient world 
and continued his jihaad in the way of Allah and Islam. 


The sweet fragrance of this man's spirit will linger forever more 
whenever horses neigh and the edge of swords glitter and the 
standards of monotheism flutter over Muslim armies. He used to 
say, "Nothing is dearer to me than a frosty night in the company of an 
infantry of Muhaajiruun when we are to attack the disbelievers in the 
morning. Not even the night in which I was wedded to a new bride or 
received the glad tidings of the birth of a new child." 


Therefore, the tragedy of his life, in his opinion, was dying in 
bed after he had spent his entire life on horseback, raising his 
glittering sword. It was difficult for him to accept that he was to die 
in bed after all the battles he had fought next to the Prophet (PBUH), 
and after he had annihilated the Roman and Persian empires and 
after he had galloped to Iraq where he achieved one victory after 
another until he had liberated it. Then he had turned to Syria where 
he had achieved one victory after another until he had set it free from 
the bonds of disbelief. 


Inspite of his position as a commander, he was so modest that 
if you had seen him you would not have distinguished him from 
among his soldiers, yet at the same time, you would have known at 
once that he must be a commander from the way he shouldered 
responsibilities and set himself as a good example. 


Again, the tragedy of this hero's life was dying in bed. He said 
as his tears flowed, “All the battles I fought in left my body scarred 
with wounds and stabs everywhere, yet here I am dying in bed as if I 


246 


had never witnessed war before. I hope that the cowards will not 
have a day's rest even after I am dead.” 


These words were becoming of such a man. When the moment 
of departure was close, he dictated his will. Can you guess to whom 
he left all his valuables? It was to ‘Umar Ibn Al Khattaab himself. 
Can you guess what were his valuables? They were his horse and his 
weapon. And what? He had nothing else to bequeath but his horse 
and weapon. 


Thus, his only obsession while he was alive was achieving 
victory over the enemies of truth. He was not in the least obsessed 
with life, with all its splendors and luxury. There was one thing that 
he obsessively cherished and treasured. It was his helmet. He lost it 
in the Battle of Al-Yarmuuk, and he exhausted himself and others in 
searching for it. When he was criticized for that, he said, "I keep it 
for luck, for it has some hairs of the Prophet's forehead. It makes me 
feel optimistic that victory is within reach." 


* + + 


Finally, the body of the hero left his home carried on the 
shoulders of his companions. The deceased's mother took one last 
look at the hero, her eyes full of determination tinged with sadness as 
she commended him to Allah's protection and said, "There are far, far 
better than a thousand men who flung themselves into the battlefield. 
Do you ask me about his valor? He was much more courageous than 
a huge lion that protects its cubs in the time of danger. Do you ask 
me about his generosity? He was far more generous than an 
overwhelming torrential rain that slides down from the mountains." 


“Umar's heart throbbed and his eyes flowed with tears when he 
heard her recite these lines of poetry: "You spoke the truth. By Allah, 
he was everything you said he was." 


The hero was buried. His companions stood at his grave in 


247 


reverence. They felt that the whole universe was so peaceful, humble, 
and silent that it seemed as if the whole world went into mourning. 


I imagine that this awesome stillness was broken only by the 
neighing of a horse that tugged at its halter and went to its master's 
grave guided by his scent. As it reached the silent congregation and 
the moist grave, it shook its head and neighed sharply as it used to 
do when the hero was on its back devastating the thrones of Persia 
and Rome, curing the delusions of paganism and oppression, and 
eliminating the powers of backwardness and disbelief to pave the 
way for Islam. As it fixed its eyes on the grave, it kept on raising and 
lowering its head as if it were bidding its last farewell to its master 
and hero. Then it stood still with its head raised, yet its eyes flowed 
with tears. Khaalid bequeathed it along with his weapons to “Umar 
in the way of Allah. Yet who is valiant and great enough to deserve 
to mount it after Khaalid? 


Alas, you hero of all victory, the dawn of all nights. You soared 
with your army above the horrors of war when you said to your 
soldiers, "The darkest hour is that before dawn." This became a 
saying afterwards. 


May Allah bless your morning, Abu Sulaimaan. May Allah 
bestow glory, praise, and eternity on you, Khaalid. 


Let us now repeat after ‘Umar the Commander of the Faithful 
the sweet elegy with which he paid his last farewell to Khaalid: "May 
Allah have mercy on you, Abu Sulaimaan. What you have now is far 
better than what you had in life, for you are now with Allah. You 
were honored in life and content in death." 


248 


(23) 
QAIS Ibn Sa*‘D IBN ‘UBAADAH 
The Craftiest of Arabs but for Islam 


Although he was young, the Ansaar treated him as a leader. 
They used to say, "If only we could buy him a beard!" He was not 
lacking in any of the characteristics that a leader should have except 
the traditional beard. 


But who was this lad for whom his people were willing to 
spend their money to buy a beard that would make his appearance 
faultless and becoming of his genuine greatness and astonishing 
leadership? 


This young man was Qais Ibn Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubaadah. He belonged 
to one of the most distinguished and generous Arab houses, on which 
the Prophet (PBUH) commented, “Generosity is the prevailing trait 
of this family.” 


He was a crafty man, and there was no end to his tricks, 
skillfulness, and cleverness. He spoke the truth when he said, "If it 
were not for Islam, I would have used my craftiness to outwit all the 
Arabs.” 


He was sharp-witted, tricky, and resourceful. In the As-Siffiin 
Battle, he sided with ~Aliy against Mu’aawiyah. He sat there turning 
over in his mind the plot that would make Mu‘aawiyah and his men 
the worst losers, but the more he thought about his plot, the more he 
realized that it came under the heading of dangerous evil plotting. He 
then repeated Allah's verse < But the evil plot encompasses only him 
who makes it > (35:43). Consequently, he rejected the plot altogether 
and asked Allah's forgiveness, saying, "By Allah, if Mu‘aawiyah is 
destined to have the upper hand over us, he will not have it because 
he has out-witted us, but because our piety and fear of Allah have 
run short." 


249 


This man was one of the Ansaar from the Khazraj tribe. He 
belonged to a great family and inherited all the excellent qualities of 
his ancestors. He was the son of Sa‘d Ibn “Ubaadah, the Khazraj 
leader with whom we will be acquainted. 


When Sa‘d submitted himself to Islam, he held his son Qais's 
hand and introduced him to the Prophet (PBUH) saying, “This is 
your servant from now on." The Prophet (PBUH) saw in Qais all the 
qualities of excellence and righteousness, so he asked him to sit next 
to him and said, "This place will always be filled by him for the rest 
of his life." Anas, the Companion of Allah's Prophet (PBUH) said, 
"Qais Ibn Sa*d Ibn ‘Ubaadah was to the Prophet like a chief officer to 
a commander." 


Before his Islam, he was full of craftiness to the extent that no 
one was able to get the better of him. The people of Al- Madiinah 
and its surroundings fell short of his cunning. When he embraced 
Islam, it turned his life and even disposition upside-down as it 
taught him how to treat people with sincerity rather than with deceit. 
He was a truly faithful and loyal Muslim. Therefore, he threw aside 
his cunning and fatal maneuvers. Yet, whenever he faced a difficult 
situation, his restrained and thwarted craftiness tried to rebel and 
gain control over him and his actions, and the only thing that made 
him come to grips with it were these words: "If it were not for Islam I 
would have used my craftiness to outwit all the Arabs." 


* * * 


His cleverness was surpassed only by his generosity. 
Generosity was not an accidental behavior on Qais's part, for he 
belonged to a family renowned for its generosity. It was the custom 
in those times for all the wealthy and generous people to bid a crier 
to stand on a high place in the daytime to call guests and passers- 
by to come for food and rest; then, at night, he would light a fire to 
guide strangers to where food was. People at that time used to say, 
"He who likes fat and meat must go to Duliim Ibn Haarithah's house 
for food." Now, Duliim Ibn Haarithah was Qais's great- 


250 


grandfather. Thus, Qais was suckled amidst generosity and charity 
in this high-born family. 


One day, both Abu Bakr and ‘Umar commented on his 
generosity saying, "If we let this lad give free rein to his generosity, he 
would exhaust his father's wealth." When Sa*d Ibn *Ubaadah heard 
about what they had said, he cried out, "Abu Quhaafah and Ibn Al- 
Khattaab should not have tried to encourage my son to become a 
miser!" 


One day, he lent a debtor who was experiencing hard times a 
large sum of money. At the appointed time for repayment, this man 
went to repay his debt to Qais yet he refused saying, "I never take 
back anything that I have given." 


* * + 


Human nature is unchangeable. Both generosity and courage 
are inseparable. Indeed, genuine generosity and courage are like 
twins: neither is found on its own. If you meet a generous man who 
is not courageous, then be certain that what you have seen is not real 
generosity but a mere superficial pretence. On the other hand, if you 
find someone who is courageous but not generous, then be certain that 
what you have seen is not courage but a mere impetuous and reckless 
whim. Qais Ibn Sa‘d held the reins of generosity with his right hand 
along with courage and valor. It seems as if he was meant by these 
lines of poetry: 


If a flag was hoisted in celebration of glory 
Then it must have been held by the right hand of an 
Arab. 


His valor was outstanding in all the battles in which he fought 
when the Prophet (PBUH) was alive and even after his death. 


When courage depends on honesty rather than craftiness, and 
on straightforwardness and confrontation rather than prevarication 
and maneuvering, then there must be difficult and endless trouble and 


intolerable hardships for its possessor. Ever since Qais threw aside 
his incredible skill of cunning and maneuvering and held onto his 
straightforward and conspicuous courage, he felt relieved and 
content, notwithstanding the problems he had to confront and the 
obligations he had to fulfill. 


Genuine courage stems solely out of its possessor's conviction. 
This conviction is not affected by desire or whim, but rather by 
truthfulness and honesty with himself. 


Hence, when the conflict between “Aliy and Mu*‘aawiyah 
started, Qais sat alone trying to side with the one whom he believed 
to be in the right. Then as soon as he decided that “Aliy was right, he 
did not hesitate to stand by his side with admirable pride, valor, 
and fearlessness. 


Qais was one of the fearless heros of As-Sifiin, Al-Jamal and 
An-Nahrawaan. He carried the Ansaar’s standard and cried out, 
"The standard that I'm carrying now is the same one that I used to 
carry when we marched for war with the Prophet (PBUH) and had 
Jibriil as our reinforcement. Any man who has no one but the Ansaar 
on his side is a lucky man." 


Imam *Aliy assigned him to govern Egypt. Now, Mu‘aawiyah’s 
eyes were always set on Egypt, as he considered it the most precious 
stone in his prospective crown. Therefore, no sooner had 
Mu‘aawiyah heard that Qais was to govern Egypt than he lost his 
self-control and was gripped by apprehensions lest Qais should 
stand forever in his way to rule Egypt, even if he achieved a decisive 
victory over Imam “Aliy. Hence, he used all his cunning methods and 
unscrupulous tricks to defame Qais before ~Aliy. 


Finally, Imam *Aliy ordered him to leave Egypt. Qais had a 
legitimate chance to use his cleverness, for he realized that 
Mu ‘aawiyah must have incited *Aliy against him through his sly and 
crafty tricks after he had failed to win him over to his side. He 
aimed at inciting Imam ~Aliy against Qais by casting doubts on his 
loyalty to him. Therefore, the best answer to Mu‘aawiyah’s evil plots 


252 


was to show more loyalty to “Aliy and what he represented. This 
loyalty was not a mere pretence or a means to an end on Qais's part, 
but rather his firm conviction and belief. Therefore, he did not feel for 
a moment that he was dismissed from his position, for Qais 
considered the governorship and all other positions as a means to 
the ultimate end, namely, to serve his faith and religion. He 
dedicated himself to the service of the truth. Whether he maintained 
his governorship of Egypt or stood by Imam “Aliy in the battlefield, it 
was one and the same thing for him, as long as they were a means to 
attain truth. 


* * * 


When Mu‘aawiyah left the Muslims no other way out but to 
unsheathe their swords against one another, Qais took the command 
of 5,000 Muslims who shared in mourning for Imam “Aliy's death. 


Al-Hasan thought that it would be best to put an end to the 
prolonged suffering of Muslims and that deadly horrible conflict. 


Therefore he agreed to negotiate with Mu‘aawiyah and finally 
gave him his oath of allegiance. When this happened, Qais pondered 
the matter in his mind and decided that no matter how right Al- 
Hasan was in his decision, his soldiers had every right to be 
consulted. Thus, he called them together and addressed them 
saying, "If you wish, we will keep on fighting to the last breath, or if 
you wish, I will ask Mu‘aawiyah to guarantee your safety and 
security." 


Naturally, Mu‘aawiyah was relieved and overjoyed to be rid of 
one of his most dreaded and dangerous foes. 


This man whose craftiness was tamed and subdued by Islam 
died in A.H. 59 in Al-Madiinah . This was the man who used to say, 
"If I did not hear the Prophet say, 'Craftiness and deceit reside in 
hell,’ I would have been the craftiest man of the nation.” In the end he 
died, yet the fragrance of this trustworthy and disciplined Muslim 
still lingers on. 


253 


(24) 
“UMAIR IBN WAHB 
The Satan of Paganism and Disciple of Islam 


On the Day of Badr, he was one of the leaders who took up 
their swords to put an end to Islam. He was sharp-sighted and a 
perfect estimator, so his people delegated him to determine the 
number of Muslims who set forth with the Messenger and to see if the 
Muslims had ambushers or reinforcements behind them. ~Umair Ibn 
Wahb Al-Jambii galloped on his horse round the camp of the 
Muslims, then returned to his people and told them that there were 
about 300 men, and his estimation was right. 


They asked him if they had reinforcements behind them. He 
said, "I found nothing. But O you Quraish, I saw horses carrying 
veritable death. They have neither fortitude nor refuge except their 
swords. By Allah! I see if one of them is killed, one of you will be 
killed also. If they killed the same number as you, what would be the 
benefit of life after that? Think wisely." 


Some of the leaders of the Quraish were affected by his opinion 
and what he had said and were about to gather their men and return 
to Makkah without fighting, were it not for Abu Jahl who altered their 
opinion and ignited the fire of spite and war, in which he was its 
first victim. 


* * * 


The Quraish gave him the epithet "The Satan of Quraish". On 
the Day of Badr, the Satan of Quraish fought fiercely and wildly, but 
the forces of the Quraish returned to Makkah completely beaten and 
‘Umair Ibn Wahb left a part of himself at Al-Madiinah, as the 
Muslims had taken his son as a prisoner of war. 


254 


One day, he joined his cousin Safwaan Ibn Umaiyah who was 
chewing his enemies in deadly bitterness because his father Umaiyah 
Ibn Khalaf had been killed at Badr and his bones buried at Al-Qaliib. 


Safwaan and ‘Umair sat together ruminating on their enemies. 
Let ‘Urwah Ibn Az- Zubair tell us their long dialogue: 


Safwaan, mentioning those who were killed at Badr said, "By 
Allah, there isn't any good in life after them." ‘Umair said, "That's 
true. By Allah, were it not for debts that I'm unable to repay and my 
children who I fear might be vagabonds after me, I would ride to 
Muhammad and kill him. I have a plausable reason to give him. I'll 
say that I have come for the sake of my son, a prisoner of war." 


Safwaan seized the chance and said, "I'll repay your debts and 
maintain your children with mine and comfort them as long as they 
live." “Umair agreed and said, "Keep it secret." Then he ordered his 
sword to be sharpened and poisoned and set out. 


When he arrived at Al-Madiinah, ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab was 
sitting among some of the Muslims talking about the Day of Badr. 
“Umar looked and saw “Umair Ibn Wahb, girded with his sword, 
making his camel kneel at the door of the mosque. ‘Umar said, "That 
dog, the enemy of Allah, ‘Umair Ibn Wahb! By Allah, he has come 
for nothing but evil. It is he who provoked us on the Day of Badr." 


“Umar entered and said to the Messenger (PBUH), "O Prophet 
of Allah , here is the enemy of Allah, ‘“Umair Ibn Wahb come girded 
with his sword." 


The Prophet (PBUH) said, “Let him in." ‘Umar came and took 
him by the scabbard of his sword round his neck and said to some 
of the men, "Enter and sit with the Prophet (PBUH) and be cautious 
of that fellow, he is dishonest.". Then ‘Umar entered holding the 
scabbard of his sword round his neck and when the Prophet saw 
him, he told “Umar to let him alone and said to “Umair, "Draw 
nearer.” 


255 


‘Umair approached and said, "Good morning." That was the 
salutation in the period of Jahiliyah. 


The Prophet (PBUH) said, "Allah has honored us with a better 
salutation than yours. It is As-Salaam, the salutation of the believers 
in Paradise." 


~Umair said, "O, Muhammad, by Allah I have heard it recently." 


The Prophet (PBUH) said, "What made you come, ‘Umair?" 
‘Umair said, "I have come for the sake of this captive in your hands." 
The Prophet (PBUH) said, " Tell the truth, “Umair, what have you 
come for ?” ~Umair, "I have come for that purpose." The Prophet 
(PBUH) said, "But you sat with Safwaan Ibn Umaiyah at Al-Hijir 
and mentioned those of Al-Qaliib from the Quraish, then you said, 
were it not for my debts and my children, I would ride and kill 
Muhammad. Safwaan promised to repay your debts and maintain 
your children on condition that you kill me, but Allah prevented you 
from doing so." 


At the moment, ‘Umair cried, "I witness that there is no god 
but Allah and that you are His Prophet. That matter wasn't 
attended by anyone except Safwaan and me. By Allah, Allah told it 
to you. Praise be to Allah who guided me to Islam." The Prophet 
(PBUH) said to his companions, "Teach your brother the religion and 
how to reach the Qur'aan and set free the prisoner of war." 


+ * * 


Thus, “Umair Ibn Wahb embraced Islam. Thus, the Satan of 
Quraish was so overwhelmed by the light of the Prophet (PBUH) and 
the light of Islam that, in a moment, he embraced Islam and turned 
into the Disciple of Islam. 


“Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, (May Allah be pleased with him) said, 


256 


“By Allah, I hated him more than I hated a pig, when he appeared. 
But now, I love him more than I love some of my sons.” 


* * * 


“Umair sat thinking deeply about the tolerance of this religion 
and the greatness of its Prophet. He remembered his previous days in 
Makkah when he was arguing and fighting against Islam before the 
Hijrah of the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions to Al-Madiinah. 
Then he remembered his fighting on the Day of Badr and his coming 
on this day to kill the Prophet. All that was abolished in a moment 
of saying, "There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is His 
Messenger." 


What tolerance! What purity, what self confidence that this 
great religion carries. At such a moment Islam abolished all his 
previous sins, Muslims forgave all his crimes and hate, opened their 
hearts and embraced him. Is not he whose sword is still glimmering in 
front of their eyes, planning with devilish intention to commit the 
most ignoble deed? All that was forgotten and nothing was 
mentioned. ‘Umair became in a single moment, one of the Muslims 
and one of the Prophet's Companions with their rights and duties. 
Did not he whom “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab wanted to kill a short 
time ago become dearer to him than his sons? 


If in one moment of truth when ‘Umair embraced Islam he 
deserved all the respect, honor, glory, and splendor of Islam, then 
Islam is indeed a great religion. 


* * * 


Within a short period of time, ‘Umair knew that his duty 
towards this religion was to serve it as much as he had fought it, to 
support it as much as he had conspired against it and to show Allah 
and His Prophet what they liked of truth, struggle, and obedience. 


Thus, one day he came to the Prophet and said "O Prophet of 
Allah, I had been doing my best to put out the light of Allah and was 


257 


fond of hurting the Muslims. I would like you to give me permission 
to go to Makkah to call them to Allah, His Prophet and to Islam. 
Allah may guide them, otherwise, I'll hurt them in their religion as I 
used to hurt your companions in their religion." 


From the time “Umair left Makkah for Al-Madiinah, Safwaan 
Ibn Umaiyah, who had persuaded ‘Umair to go and kill the 
Messenger, walked proudly in the streets of Makkah ,and dropped 
into its meetings and clubs joyfully and merrily. And whenever his 
people and his brothers asked him about the reason for his merriment 
and ecstacy when the bones of his father were still warm in the sands 
of Badr, he rubbed his hands proudly and said to the people, 
“Hurrah ! After a few days, happy news will come and make you 
forget the Battle of Badr." Every morning he went out of Makkah and 
asked the caravans, "Hasn't any matter occurred in Al-Madiinah?" 
Their answers were in the negative, as none of them had heard or seen 
any important matter in Al-Madiinah. 


safwaan continued without despair asking caravan after 
caravan until one day he met one and said to them, "Hasn't anything 
taken place in Al-Madiinah?" The traveler said, "Yes, a very 
important matter occurred." With a radiant face and at the peak of 
ecstasy Safwaan asked the traveler anxiously, "What happened? Tell 
me!" The man said ,""Umair Ibn Wahb has embraced Islam, and he is 
there learning the religion and the Qur'aan!" 


Safwaan felt giddy, and the good news which he had 
announced to his people and for which they were waiting to make 
them forget the Battle of Badr came to him that day dreadful enough 
to cause his ruin! 


One day the traveler arrived, and ‘Umair returned to Makkah 
holding his sword, ready to fight, and Safwaan Ibn “Umaiyah was 
the first who met him. No sooner did Safwaan see ‘Umair than he 
got ready to attack him, but the combat-ready sword in the hand of 


“Umair dissuaded him. He was satisfied with some insults vented on 
“Umair and went his way. 


“Umair entered Makkah as a Muslim though he had left it a 
few days earlier as a polytheist. In his memory was the image of 
“Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab when he embraced Islam, and cried, "By 
Allah! I'll sit as a believer in every place where I sat as a polytheist." 


Taking these words as a motto and that situation as a model, 
*Umair made up his mind to sacrifice his life for the religion that he 
had boldly fought against when he had the force to hurt any Muslim. 
And thus he began to compensate for what he had missed and 
to race with time by calling to Islam day and night, secretly and 
openly. In his heart faith floods upon him with safety, guidance, and 
light. 


On his tongue are words of truth with which he calls to justice, 
charity, kindness and good. In this right hand is a sword with which 
he terrifies the severers who hinder the believers from the path of 
Allah and want it crooked. Within a few weeks, those who embraced 
Islam by the guidance of ‘Umair Ibn Wahb were becoming 
innumerable. “Umair set forth with them to Al- Madiinah in a 
delightful, long caravan. 


The desert that they crossed during their journey could not hold 
its astonishment and wonder at that man who had crossed it a short 
while ago holding his sword and hurrying towards Al-Madiinah to 
kill the Prophet (PBUH). Then he had crossed it returning from Al- 
Madiinah with quite a different face from the first one. He was 
reciting the Qur'aan on the back of his she-camel. Now, he was 
crossing the desert for the third time ahead of a long procession of 
believers filling the desert with the praise of Allah. 


* * * 


Yes, it was a great announcement, that the Satan of the 
Quraish was turned by the guidance of Allah into a bold Disciple of 
Islam who stood beside the Prophet (PBUH) in battles and situations 


259 


and whose loyalty to the religion of Allah continued to be firm even 
after the departure of the Prophet from life. 


On the day of the Conquest of Makkah, he did not forget his 
companion and relative, to call him to Islam, especially after there 
was no doubt in the truth of the Prophet (PBUH) and his mission. 


Safwaan had traveled to Jeddah on his way to Yemen by sea. 
“Umair pitied him so much that he decided to deliver him from Satan 
by all means. He hurried to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, "O 
Prophet of Allah, Safwaan Ibn “Umaiyah is the chief of his people. 
He set off escaping from you to throw himself into the sea. Give him 
safety. Peace be upon you.” The Prophet (PBUH) said, "He is safe." 
“Umair said "O Prophet of Allah, give me a token for his safety." The 
Prophet (PBUH) gave him his turban which he had worn when he 
entered Makkah. 


We let “Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair complete the story: “Umair set off 
till he reached Safwaan when he was about to sail. “Umair said, "O 
Safwaan, I sacrifice my mother and father for you. Avert perishing 
yourself. This is the safety of the Prophet of Allah (PBUH) I came to 
you with." Safwaan said to him, "Woe to you! Go away, don't speak 
to me." *Umair said to him, "O Safwaan! I sacrifice my mother and 
father for you. The Prophet of Allah is the best, the most righteous, 
and the most clement of all people. His glory is yours and his honor 
is yours." Safwaan said, "I'm afraid.". ‘Umair said, “He's more 
clement and more generous than that." He returned with him until 
they came to the Prophet (PBUH). Safwaan said to the Prophet, "He 
claims that you have given me safety." The Prophet said, "He speaks 
the truth." Safwaan said to the Prophet, "Give me the option for two 
months.” The Prophet (PBUH) said, "You have the option for four 
months." 


After a while Safwaan embraced Islam, and ~Umair was 
extremely happy about his acceptance of Islam. 


* + * 


260 


Ibn Wahb went on his blessed journey to Allah following the 
great Prophet by whom Allah saved people from straying and took 
them out of the depth of darkness into light. 


261 


(25) 
ABU AD-DARDAA' 
What a Wise Man Was He! 


While the armies of Islam were advancing victoriously, there 
lived in Al-Madiinah a wonderful philosopher and wise man whose 
wisdom flowed in his blooming bright words. He kept saying to 
those around him, "Can I tell you about the best of your deeds which 
are more thriving and better than invading your enemies, cutting their 
throats and cutting yours, and better than dirhams and dinars?" 


Those who listened to him craned and hurried to ask him; 
"And what is that, O Abu Ad-Dardaa'?" Abu Al-Dardaa' resumed 
his speech and his face glittered with the light of faith and wisdom, 
"The remembrance of Allah; the remembrance of Allah is the greatest 
thing in life." 


That wonderful wise man was not preaching an isolationist 
philosophy nor by his own words. He was not preaching negativism 
nor the retirement from the responsibilities of the new religion that 
considers struggle its cornerstone. Yes, Abu Ad-Dardaa’ was not 
that kind of man, but rather he was the man who took up his sword 
and struggled with the Prophet of Allah (PBUH) since he had 
embraced Islam till the help and victory of Allah came. 


However, he was that type who finds himself in his full lively 
existence whenever he is alone contemplating under shelter of the 
sanctuary of wisdom, and he dedicated his life to seeking truth and 
certitude. Abu Ad-Dardaa’, the wise man of those great days (May 
Allah be pleased with him) was a person who looked forward to 
His Prophet (PBUH), and he also believed that this faith, with its 
duties and understanding, was the only ideal way to truth. 


262 


Thus, he was engrossed with his faith, dedicating himself to it 
and forming his life strictly, wisely, and seriously according to it. He 
walked on that path till he arrived at the truth and took his high 
position among the truthful ones when communing with his Lord and 
reciting this verse: < Truly, my prayer and my devotion, my life and 
my death are all for GOD, the Lord of the Worlds > (6 : 162). 


Yes, the struggle of Abu Ad-Dardaa against and with himself 
ended in the attainment of this high spiritual position, remote 
superiority, and personal sacrifice which made him dedicate all his 
ufe to Allah, the Cherisher of the Worlds. 


* * * 


Now, let us approach the saint and wise man. Do you observe 
the light that radiates round his forehead? Do you smell the good 
perfume coming from his direction? It is the light of wisdom and the 
perfume of faith. Faith and wisdom have come together happily in 
this man. His mother was asked about what he liked best; she 
answered, "Contemplation and consideration. " This is completely in 
accord with the saying of Allah in more than one verse <... 
Therefore take warning, you, who have eyes to see! > (59 : 2). 


When he urged his brothers to contemplate and think, he said to 
them, "Contemplation for an hour is better than worshipping for the 
whole night." Worshipping and contemplation and seeking after truth 
overpowered him and all his life. 


On the day he embraced Islam and pledged his allegiance to the 
Prophet (PBUH) in this glorious religion, he was a successful trader 
of Al-Madiinah. He spent a part of his life in trade before he 
embraced Islam and before the Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslims 
migrated to Al-Madiinah. 


He had just embraced Islam a short time before when... But, 
let him complete the speech for us: I embraced Islam at the hands of 
the Prophet (PBUH) and I was a trader. I wanted to combine trade 


263 


and worship, but they would never go together. I abandoned trade 
and retained worship. Today, it doesn't please me to sell and buy to 
earn 300 dinars a day, although my shop is at the door of the 
mosque. I can't say that Allah forbids selling, but I'd like to be of 
those whom neither traffic nor merchandise can divert from 
remembrance of Allah. 


Do you see how he speaks completely and correctly, while 
wisdom and truth shine through his words. He hurries before we ask 
him, "Does Allah forbid trade, O Abu Ad-Dardaa’?” He hurries to 
sweep away this question from our minds and refers us to the 
superior goal that he was seeking and for which he left trade, in spite 
of his success as a trader. He was a man searching for spiritual 
excellence and superiority and looking for the maximum degree of 
perfection available to human beings. He wanted worship as a 
ladder that raises him to the highest level of goodness and 
approaches right in its glory and truth in its shining origin. If he 
wanted worship to be merely duties to be done and prohibition to be 
left, he could manage both his worship and his trade and deeds. 


There are many good traders, and there are many good and 
pious persons working in trade. Among the Companions of the 
Prophet of Allah (PBUH), there were men whom neither traffic nor 
merchandise could divert from the remembrance of Allah. But they 
worked hard to develop their trade and their money by which they 
served the cause of Islam and satisfied the needs of the Muslims. But 
the method of those Companions does not diminish the method of 
Abu Ad-Dardaa’, nor does his method diminish theirs, as everyone 
is fit for what he is created. 


And Abu Ad-Dardaa’ felt that he was created for what he 
devoted his life to: excellence in seeking after the truth by practicing 
the ultimate expression of celibacy according to the faith to which he 
was guided by Allah, His Prophet and Islam. 


Call it mysticism if you wish, but it was the mysticism of a man 
who had plenty of them keenness of a believer, the capability of a 


264 


philosopher, the experience of a fighter, and the jurisprudence of the 
Prophet's Companions. This made his mysticism a lively movement 
in establishing the soul and not merely shadows of this building. 


Yes, that was Abu Ad-Dardaa’', the Companion of the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and his pupil. That was Abu Ad- 
Dardaa’, the saint and the wise man, a man who repelled life with 
both his hands, a man who secluded himself till he burnished and 
sanctified his soul and it became a clear mirror so that wisdom, 
rightness, and good reflected in it. That made Abu Ad-Dardaa' a 
great teacher and an upright wise man. 


What happy persons are those who come and listen to him! 
Come and seek his wisdom, O people of understanding. Let us begin 
with his philosophy towards life and towards its delights and 
vanities. He was influenced to the depths of his soul by the saying of 
Prophet, "Little and satisfied is better than much and diverted." 
Allah Almighty said, < Woe to every taunting slanderer, backbiter, 
who piles up wealth and counts over it again and again, thinking 
that his wealth will make him immortal! > (104 : 1-3). 


The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) said, "Leave the worries of life 
as far as possible," and "He who makes life his only aim, Allah will 
sunder his unity and make poverty between his two eyes. He who 
makes the Hereafter his only goal, Allah makes riches in his heart 
and makes every good hurry to him." 


Therefore, he lamented over those who fell captive to the 
ambition of wealth and said, "I seek refuge with the Lord from the 
dispersion of the heart." He was asked, "What is dispersion of the 
heart, Abu Ad-Dardaa'?" He answered, " That means I have money 
everywhere." He called people to possess life by doing without it, 
that is the real possessing of it. But running after its endless 
enticements is the worst kind of slavery. Then he said, "He who can 
not do without life is lifeless." 


265 


In his opinion, money is only a means to a mild satisfied living. 
Thus, people should take it legitimately (in a halaal way) and earn it 
kindly and mildly and not covet it greedily. He said, "Don't eat 
anything unless it is good, don't earn any money unless it is good, 
don't take anything to your house unless it is good." 


He wrote to his companions, "After that, any temporary thing 
you possess in life was possessed by someone else before you, and 
will be owned by another after you, and you have nothing except 
what you offered to yourself. 


"Give preference over yourself to him from whom you are 
collecting money for your sons to inherit, since you collect money for 
one of the two: either a good son who spends the money in obedience 
to Allah, thus he will be happy with what you earned and free from 
troubles; or a disobedient son who spends it in sins and disobedience 
to Allah, and so you will be tortured by what you had collected for 
him. Entrust their living to the Bounty of Allah and save yourself.” 


The whole of life from Abu Ad-Dardaa's point of view is 
merely a loan. 


When Cyprus was conquered and the booty was carried to Al- 
Madiinah, people saw Abu Ad-Dardaa' weep. Astonished, they 
approached and Jubair Ibn Nufair said to him, "Why are you weeping 
on the day that Allah supported Islam and the Muslims?" Abu Ad- 
Dardaa’ replied with wisdom and deep understanding, "Woe to you, 
Jubair! What a trifling thing creatures are if they leave the commands 
of Allah. It was the best nation, having dominion, but if left the 
commands of Allah, and therefore it came to what you see." Yes, 
thus he reasoned the quick collapse to the armies of Islam in the 
conquered countries was caused by the bankruptcy of true 
spiritualism that protected them and connected them with Allah. So 
he feared for the Muslims in the coming days when the ties of faith 
would decline and the bonds to Allah, truth, and goodness would 


266 


languish. Consequently, the loan would be taken from their hands as 
easily as it had been put in their hands before. 


* * * 


As the whole of life was merely a loan in his view, it was also a 
bridge to an immortal and more magnificent life. 


Once his companions went to visit him when he was ill and 
found him sleeping on a piece of leather. They said to him, "If you 
wish, you will have better and more comfortable bedding.” He 
replied pointing with his forefinger and looking with his bright eyes at 
the far distance, “Our home is there. For it, we gather and to it we 
return. We travel to it and we work for it.” 


This look at life was not only a point of view but also a way 
of life. Yaziid Ibn Mu‘aawiyah wanted to marry his daughter, Ad- 
Dardaa’, but he refused him and married her to a poor pious Muslim. 


People were greatly astonished by that behavior but Abu Ad- 
Darda’‘a taught them, saying, "What about Ad-Dardaa’ if she had the 
servants and splendors and she was dazzled by the decorations and 
pleasures of the palace? What then would happen to her religion?" 


This was a wise man of upright morals and clear heart. He 
refused everything that attracted the brain and fascinated the heart 
and by doing so he did not escape from happiness but escaped to it. 


Real happiness, in his belief, was to possess life, not to be 
possessed by it. Whenever the needs of people are limited by 
contentment and uprightness, they will realize the reality of life as a 
bridge on which they cross to the home of permanence, return, and 
immortality. Whenever they do so, their share of real happiness is 
greater and plentiful. He also said, "It is not better to have much 
money and many sons, but it is better to have much clemency, much 
knowledge, and to compete with people in the worship of Allah." 


267 


During the caliphate of ‘Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased with 
him), Mu‘aawiyah was the governor of Syria and Abu Ad-Dardaa' 
agreed to occupy the position of the judge according to the caliph's 
desire. There in Syria, he stood strictly as an example to all those 
who were tempted by the pleasures of life. He began to remind them 
of the method of the Prophet (PBUH), his asceticism and that of the 
early righteous Muslims and martyrs. 


Syria at that time was an urbanized region overflowing with the 
pleasures and amenities of life, and the inhabitants were greatly 
annoyed by that person who embittered their lives by his preaching. 
He gathered them and stood among them preaching, "O people of 
Syria, you are brothers in religion, neighbors at home, and supporters 
against your enemies. But, why aren't you ashamed? You earn what 
you don't eat, and build what you don't dwell in, and hope for what 
you can't achieve. The peoples before you collected cautiously, and 
hoped confidently, and built firmly, but their gatherings became 
perdition, their hope became delusion, and their homes became 
graves. 


Those were the people of “Aad who filled the region from 
Adan to Oman with wealth and sons. Then a wide sarcastic smile 
would be drawn on his two lips, and he would wave his arm to the 
astonished multitude and cry sarcastically, "Who will buy the 
inheritance of ‘Aad people from me for two dirhams?" 


He was a brilliant, magnificent, and luminous man. His 
wisdom was faithful, his feelings were pious, and his logic was 
perfect and cautious. In his point of view, worship was neither 
vanity nor pride but a request for good and exposure to the mercy of 
Allah and continuous supplication that reminded man of his 
weakness and the favor of his Lord upon him. 


He said, "Request the good all your life, and expose yourselves 
to the mercy of Allah. Allah has fragrance in His mercy which He 
ushers upon those whom He pleases among His servants. Ask Allah 
to hide your defects and make your hearts steady and firm in times 
of trouble.” 


268 


This wise man was always open-eyed to vanity in worship, of 
which he warned people. That vanity makes those who have weak 
faith worship proudly and boast of their worship to others. Listen 
to him saying, "An atom's weight of benevolence from a pious man is 
much better than a mountain's weight of worship from the boaster." 


He also said, "Don't charge people with unwanted affairs and 
don't call them to account as if you are their Lord. Guard your own 
souls. He who follows up the deeds of people will have his grief 
increased." 


Abu Ad-Dardaa' did not want the worshipper, whatever rank 
he reaches in worship, to call people to account as if he were the 
Lord. He should praise Allah for His reconciliation and help by 
prayer, noble feelings, and good intentions for those who cannot 
achieve such success. Do you know any better and brighter wisdom 
than that of this wise man? 


His companion Abu Qalaabah, tells us about him: One day 
Abu Ad-Dardaa' passed by a man who had committed a sin, and 
people were insulting him. He prohibited them and said, "If you 
found him in a ditch, would you not take him out of it?” They said, 
"Yes." He said to them, "Don't insult him. Praise Allah that He 
protected you from such an evil." They said to him, "Don't you hate 
him?" He said, "No, I hate his deed, and if he leaves it, he will be my 
brother." 


If this is one of the two aspects of worship, the second phase is 
knowledge and learning. Abu Ad-Dardaa' as a wise man and as a 
worshipper sanctified knowledge to a great extent and so he said, 
“None of you can be pious unless he is knowledgeable, and he cannot 
enjoy knowledge unless he applies it practically." 


Yes, knowledge, in his opinion, was understanding, behavior, 
learning, method, idea, and life. Because this sanctification is of the 
wise, we find him claiming that the teacher is like the student in 


269 


favor, recompense, and position. He saw that the greatness of life 
was dependent on goodness before anything else. He said, "Why 
do I see your scholars going away and your ignorant people learning 
nothing? The teacher and the student of goodness are equal in 
recompense and there is goodness in the other people besides the 
two." He also said, "People are of three types : a scholar, an 
educated person, and a savage." 


As we have seen before, knowledge was not separate from 
following the wisdom of Abu Ad-Dardaa' (May Allah be pleased 
with him). He said, "The greatest fear of my soul is that it should 
say to me on the Day of Resurrection, in front of all the creatures, O 
owner, did you know? and I would reply, Yes . It will say to me, 
What did you do with what you knew? 


He used to respect scholars and honor them very much. 
Moreover, he used to pray to Allah saying, "O Lord Almighty, I take 
refuge in You against the curse of the scholars’ hearts. 


It was said to him, “How could you be cursed by their hearts?" 
He said, "Their hearts hate me." Do you see, he believed that the 
scholars hate is an unbearable curse; therefore he implored Allah to 
grant him refuge. 


The wisdom of Abu Ad-Dardaa' (May Allah be pleased with 
him) recommended fraternity and established human relations on the 
basis of human nature itself. Thus he said, "To admonish your 
brother is better than to lose him. Give your brother advice and be 
tender with him, but do not agree with his covetousness lest you 
should be like him. Tomorrow death comes and you will lose him. 
And how can you weep over him after death when you did not give 
him his right while he lived?" 


The fear of Allah in His servants is the strongest and hardest 
basis upon which Abu Ad-Dardaa' established the rights of 
fraternity. He (May Allah be pleased with him) said, "I hate to wrong 


anyone but I hate more and more to oppress the person who resorts 
to Allah, the Most High and the Most Great, for help against my 
injustice." 


Abu Ad-Dardaa’, what a great personality and bright soul you 
are! He warned people against delusion when they thought that 
unarmed weak people fell easy prey in their hands and power. He 
reminded them that those in their weakness have a destructive power 
when they implore Allah in their disability and offer their plea and 
the disgrace done to them by people. 


* * * 


This was Abu Ad-Dardaa’, the wise man. He was Abu Ad- 
Dardaa'’ the hermit, the worshipper, ever seeking Allah. When 
people praised his piety and asked him to implore Allah for them, he 
replied in humility, "I can't swim well and I fear drowning." 


* * + 


All your wisdom, and you can not swim well, O Abu Ad- 
Dardaa’? But what an astonishment, and you are nutured by the 
Prophet (PBUH), a student of the Qur'aan; son of early Islam, and a 
companion of Abu Bakr and “Umar and the rest of those men! 


271 


(26) 
ZAID IBN AL- KHATTAAB 
The Hawk of The Day of Al-Yamaamah 


One day the Prophet (PBUH) sat with a group of Muslims, and 
while they were talking, the Messenger paused, then spoke to those 
who were sitting around him saying, "Among you there is a man 
whose molar in Hell is greater than Mount Uhud.” 


Fright and terror appeared upon the faces of all those present 
because each one of them was afraid lest he should be the person 
about whom the Prophet (PBUH) prophesied a dreadful end. 


Years passed and all those Companions met their ends as 
martyrs except Abu Hurairah and Ar-Rajjaal Ibn “Unfuwah, who 
were still alive. Abu Hurairah was extremely terrified by that 
prophecy and did not feel comfortable until fate revealed the secret 
of the unfortunate man: Ar-Rajjaal Ibn ~Unfuwah, who apostatized 
from Islam and joined Musailamah the Liar, and thus witnessed the 
fulfillment of prophecy upon him. 


One day, Ar-Rajjaal Ibn ~Unfuwah went to the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) and acknowledged him and learned the teachings of 
Islam. Then he went to his people and did not return to Al- 
Madiinah till the death of the Prophet and the choice of As-Siddiiq 
as the Caliph of the Muslims. Ar-Rajjaal told Abu Bakr the news of 
the inhabitants of Al-Yamaamah and their support for Musailamah 
and proposed that he be sent to Al-Yamaamah as an envoy in order 
to confirm Islam among them. The Caliph gave him permission. 


Ar-Rajjaal went to Al-Yamaamah, and when he saw the 
numerouss supporters of Musailamah, he believed that they would be 
the victors. His perfidious nature caused him to reserve a place in the 
prospective state of Musailamah. Consequently, he apostatized from 
Islam and joined Musailamah, who promised him a prosperous 
future. 


272 


Ar-Rajjaal was more dangerous to Islam than Musailamah 
himself because he exploited his previous association with Islam and 
the period he had lived with the Messenger in Al-Madiinah, 
memorizing many verses of the Holy Qur'aan, and his intercession to 
Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him), the Caliph of the 
Muslims. Ar-Rajjaal exploited all those things for evil purposes and 
cunningly supported and confirmed the sovereignty of Musailamah 
and his false prophethood. 


He walked among people saying that he heard the Messenger of 
Allah say that he had taken Musailamah into partnership and when 
the Messenger (PBUH) died, he was worthy of carrying the banner of 
prophethood and revelation after him. 


The number of Musailamah's supporters increased to a great 
extent because of the lies of Ar-Rajjaal and his cunning exploitation 
of his previous relationships with Islam and the Messenger (PBUH). 
When the news of Ar-Rajjaal reached Al-Madiinah, the Muslims were 
exceedingly angry because of the lies of this dangerous apostate who 
used to mislead people. His evil words and deeds expanded the 
range of the war and intensified the conflict the Muslims had with 
their enemies and adversaries. The most anxious and the most eager 
to meet Ar-Rajjaal was Zaid Ibn Al-Khattaab, whose heroism and 
fame was outstanding in the biographies and books of Islamic 
history. 


I am sure that you have heard about Zaid Ibn Al-Khattaab. He 
was the brother of “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab (May Allah be pleased 
with both). Yes! he was his elder brother. He was older than “Umar 
Ibn Al-Khattaab and he embraced Islam and gained the honor of 
martyrdom before him. 


He was the ideal hero whose motto was "Actions speak louder 
than words." His faith in Allah and His Messenger and His religion 
was strong and firm. He never stayed away from the Messenger in 
any setting, and in every battle he sought martyrdom more than he 
sought victory. 


273 


On the Day of Uhud, when the fight between the believers and 
the polytheists was very fierce, Zaid was fighting boldly. His brother 
“Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab (May Allah be pleased with him) saw him as 
his shield fell down and he was within reach of the enemies. ‘Umar 
cried, "O Zaid, take my shield and fight with it!" Zaid replied, "I 
want martyrdom as you want it." He continued fighting without his 
shield with astonishing herosim. 


As we mentioned before, Zaid (May Allah be pleased with him) 
was longing to meet Ar-Rajjaal, wishing to put an end to his devilish 
life. 


In Zaid's opinion, Ar-Rajjaal was not only an apostate but also 
a hypocrite and self-seeker. Zaid was like his brother ‘Umar Ibn Al- 
Khattaab in his abhorence of hypocrisy and lying, especially when 
hypocrisy aimed at selfish gain and mean purposes. For those mean 
purposes Ar-Rajjaal committed his atrocious acts, resulting in the 
numbers of Musailamah's supporters greatly increasing and causing 
great numbers of deaths in the Apostate Battles . First he deceived 
them, and finally he led them to their deaths for the sake of his 
devilish hopes. 


Zaid prepared himself to conclude his faithful life by 
annihilating that impiety not only in Musailamah’s person but also in 
Ar-Rajjaal Ibn “Unfuwah, who was more dangerous and more 
cunning. 


The Day of Al-Yamaamah began gloomy and dim. Khaalid Ibn 
Al-Waliid gathered the Army of Islam and directed it to its positions 
and left the leadership of the army to Zaid Ibn Al-Khattaab, who 
fought Bani Haniifah, the followers of Musailamah, boldly and 
fiercely. At the beginning, the battle was leaning towards the side of 
the polytheists, and many of the Muslims fell as martyrs. Zaid saw 
the feelings of horror in the hearts of some Muslims, so he climbed a 
hill and cried, "O people! Grit your teeth, fight your enemy and go 
straight. By Allah, I'll never speak till Allah beats them or I meet Him 


274 


and then I give my evidence." Then he descended, gritting his teeth, 
pressing this lips, never moving his tongue with even a whisper. 


His only hope was to kill Ar-Rajjaal, so he began to penetrate 
the enemy army like an arrow searching for its target, until he saw 
him. 


Then he began to attack him from right and left. Whenever the 
deluge of the battle swallowed Ar-Rajjaal and hid him, Zaid dived 
towards him until the waves pushed him to the surface again. Zaid 
approached him and stretched out his sword towards him, but the 
furious human waves swallowed Ar-Rajjaal again. Then Zaid 
followed and dived after him so as not to allow him to escape. 


At last, Zaid held him by his neck and with the sword, he cut 
off his head which was full of vanity, lies, and villainy. By the death 
of the great liar, the ranks of its whole army began to fall. 


Musailamah and Al-Mahkam Ibn At-Tufail were filled with 
horror. The killing of Ar-Rajjaal spread in Musailamah's army like a 
fire on a stormy day. 


Musailamah used to promise them inevitable victory and 
that he, Ar-Rajjaal, and Al-Mahkam Ibn Attufail would promulgate 
their new religion and establish their state on the day following their 
victory! Now that Ar-Rajjaal was killed, the whole prophecy of 
Musailamah was seen as a lie, and tomorrow Al-Mahkam and 
Musailamah would meet the same fate. Thus the fatal blow of Zaid 
Ibn Al-Khattaab caused all that destruction in the lines of 
Musailamah. 


No sooner did the Muslims hear the news than they were filled 
with pride and dignity. The wounded men rose again holding their 
swords, taking no interest in their wounds. 


Even for those who were about to die, nothing connected them 
with life except that very faint light caused by hearing the good news 
which was like avery beautiful and rosy dream. They wished, if 


275 


they had any strength to fight with, they would be able to witness the 
triumph of the battle in its glorious conclusion. But how could that 
be? Since the doors of Paradise had opened to welcome them, they 
were now hearing their names while they were being called to 
immortality! 


Zaid raised his hands towards Heaven supplicating Allah and 
thanking Him for His blessings. Then he returned to his sword and his 
silence, as he had sworn by Allah not to utter a word until he had 
completed the victory or gained the honor of martyrdom. 


The battle began to lean to the side of the Muslims and their 
inevitable victory began to approach rapidly. At that moment Zaid 
did not desire a better conclusion to his life than praying to Allah to 
grant him martyrdom on that Day of Yamaamah! The wind of 
Paradise blew to fill his soul with longing, his eyes with tears, and 
his determination with firmness. He began to fight as if he were 
searching for his glorious destiny, and the hero fell! So he died a 
martyr, magnanimously, gracefully and happily. The Army of Islam 
returned to Al-Madiinah victorious. 


While ~Umar and the Caliph Abu Bakr were welcoming those 
who were returning trimuphantly, ‘Umar began to search for his 
homecoming brother with longing eyes. 


Zaid was so tall that he could be easily recognized. But before 
“Umar had strained his eyes, one of the returning Muslims 
approached and consoled him. “Umar said, "May Allah have mercy 
upon Zaid, he preceded me in two instances. He embraced Islam 
before me and gained martyrdom before me, too." 


In spite of the victories that Islam won and enjoyed, ‘Umar "Al- 
Faaruug" (Umar) never forgot his brother Zaid, and he always said, 
“Whenever the east wind blows, I smell the scent of Zaid." 


Yes! The east wind carries the perfume of Zaid (May Allah be 
pleased with him). But if the caliph gives me permission to add these 
words to his great expression so as to complete the meaning of his 


saying, these are the words: "Whenever the winds of triumph blow on 
Islam since the Day of Al-Yamaamah, Islam finds the scent, the 
struggles, the heroism, and the greatness of Zaid in these winds!" 


Blessings be upon Al-Khattaab under the flag of the Messenger 
(PBUH). Blessed be they the moment they embraced Islam. Blessed 
be they when they fought and were martyred. And blessings be upon 
them in the hereafter. 


277 


(27) 
TALHAH IBN ‘UBAID ALLAH 
The Falcon on the Day of Uhud ! 


< Of the believers are men who have been true to their pledge 
to GOD, from them some have fulfilled their pledges, and some are 
still in hope of doing so, and they never change at heart > (33 : 23). 


The Prophet (PBUH) recited this glorious verse and then turned 
to his Companions, pointed to Talhah and said, "Anyone who wants 
to please himself by looking at a man walking on the earth who has 
fulfilled his pledge of martyrdom should look at Talhah." 


The Prophet's Companions never wished nor did their hearts 
ever aspire and long for a better announcement than the one the 
Prophet (PBUH) directed to Talhah Ibn “Ubaid Allah. By such 
words he could feel secure towards his destiny and fate. He was 
going to live and die as one of those who have been true to their 
pledge so that neither civil strife could affect him, nor any kind of 
lassitude influence him. 


The Prophet (PBUH) announced Paradise to him. How then 
was the life of such a one who deserved this fine announcement? 


* * * 


He was trading in the land of Basraa, when he met one of the 
most virtuous monks there. He told him that a Prophet who was 
going to appear in the Sacred Land and whose appearance was 
prophesied by all virtuous prophets had risen and his era had 
already begun. Talhah was very much afraid to miss the procession 
of guidance, mercy, and salvation. 


When Talhah returned to his homeland Makkah after having 
spent months in Bagraa and traveling around, he found a lot of talk 
taking place here and there. Whenever he met someone or a group of 
Makkah inhabitants they would talk to him about Muhammad the 


278 


Trustworthy, about the angel sent down to him, about the mission he 
was Carrying to the Arabs in particular and all people in general. 


The first thing he asked about was Abu Bakr. He learned that 
Abu Bakr had returned with a caravan and trade not long ago and 
that he was standing at the side of Muhammad, believing in and 
defending him. 


Talhah said to himself, "Muhammad and Abu Bakr? By Allah, 
both of them would never join each other and agree upon falsehood.* 
Muhammad has already reached the age of 40. In all these years 
we've never heard him speak one single lie. Is it possible that he 
would now lie about Allah and say, 'He sent me as a prophet and 
He sent me an angel’? It's something hard to believe." 


He quickened his steps, directing them towards Abu Bakr's 
house. They did not talk for long because his long aspiration to 
meet the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and to swear to him the oath of 
allegiance was much faster than his heartbeats. 


Abu Bakr accompanied him to the Prophet (PBUH) and he 
soon embraced Islam, joining there and then the blessed ranks! 


That is how Talhah became one of the very early converts. 


* * * 


Despite his honorable rank among his clan, his vast wealth, 
and his successful trade, he had to taste his own portion of the 
Quraish's persecution. The task of torturing him and Abu Bakr was 
given to Nawfal Ibn Khuwailid, who was called The Lion of the 
Quraish. However, their persecution did not last long, as the Quraish 
soon felt ashamed and began to think about the consequences of their 
deeds. 


*See our book, Then Came Abu Bakr 


279 


Talhah emigrated to Al-Madiinah when the Prophet (PBUH) 
ordered the Muslims to emigrate. After that he experienced all the 
battles together with the Prophet (PBUH) except the Battle of Badr 
because the Prophet (PBUH) had sent him and Sa‘iid Ibn Zaid on 
an assignment outside Al-Madiinah. 


When they had fulfilled their task and were on their way back 
to Al Madiinah, the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions were 
returning home after the battle. Talhah and his companion felt so sad 
and tormented for having missed the reward of joining the Prophet 
(PBUH) in his first jihaad battle. 


However, the Prophet (PBUH) accorded them peace of mind 
when he informed them that their reward was exactly like the 
warrior's reward; moreover, he gave them a share of the booty exactly 
like the share he gave to each one who had fought the battle. 


Then came the Battle of Uhud, when the Quraish, with all their 
might and tyranny, came to take blood revenge for the Day of Badr 
and to restore their dignity by defeating the Muslims once and for all, 
a defeat which was thought by the Quraish to be a simple matter and 
a predetermined fate. The fierce battle took place, and soon the 
battlefield was filled with its awful harvest: calamity overtook the 
polytheists. 


Then when the Muslims saw them retreating, they laid down 
their weapons and the archers descended from their posts and began 
to collect their share of booty. Immediately and suddenly the 
Quraish army turned back to hold the field and tip the balance of the 
battle in their favor. 


The fighting's ferocity, cruelty, and crushing resumed. The 
surprise attack had the effect of scattering the army. 


Talhah saw that the side of the battlefield where the Prophet 
(PBUH) was standing had become the target of the polytheists' 
concentration. He immediately hurried towards the Prophet (PBUH). 


280 


He (May Allah be pleased with him) traversed a path, a long one, 
although it was in fact a short distance. 


It was a path in which a single inch could not be traversed 
except by confronting tens of ferocious swords and tens of mad 
lances. 


He could see from a far distance how the Prophet's (PBUH) 
cheek was bleeding and how he was silently suffering. It was then 
that Talhah got mad, leaped once or twice over the path of horror to 
reach the Prophet (PBUH), in front of whom he had to experience 
what he was afraid of: the swords of the polytheists drawn towards 
the Prophet (PBUH), surrounding him, wanting to get at him. 


Talhah stood there like a raging army, striking with his sword to 
the left and right. He could see the Prophet (PBUH) bleeding and his 
pains becoming more and more unbearable. He helped him and 
carried him away from the hole where his foot had gotten stuck. 


He supported the Prophet (PBUH) with his left hand and 
chest, backing up to a safe, secure place, while his right hand (May 
Allah bless his right hand) fought the swords of the polytheists who 
surrounded the Prophet and who swarmed the battlefield like 
locusts. 


Let Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq describe for us the whole scene of 
battle. “Aa'ishah once said: Whenever Abu Bakr recalled the Day of 
Uhud he used to say, It was the Talhah's day. I was the first who 
approached the Prophet (PBUH). He said to me and to Abu 
“Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah, "Watch out, for your brother." We looked 
at him, and we could see more than 70 stabs. His finger was cut off. 
We tried to remedy his condition. 


* * * 
In all the different events and battles, Talhah was always to be 


found in the forefront fighting in the cause of Allah, redeeming the 
Prophet's standard. 


281 


Talhah lived among the Muslim community, worshipping Allah 
with the worshipers, fighting in the cause of Allah with those who 
fought for truth, following the basic principles of the new religion 
which was revealed in order to bring people — all people — out of 
darkness into light. 


After he fulfilled his duties towards Allah, he went on seeking 
the bounty of Allah, expanding and promoting his successful trade 
and business. 


Talhah was one of the wealthiest Muslims. His whole fortune 
was put in the service of his religion, the standard of which he carried 
with the Prophet (PBUH). He spent it without measure, and so Allah 
increased it for him without measure. 


The Prophet (PBUH) called him "Talhah the Excellent", "Talhah 
the Splendid and "Talhah the Generous” to demonstrate his bountiful 
generosity. 


How often did he give his whole fortune away. Then Allah the 
Ever-Generous returned it to him manifold! His wife Su’adaa Bint 
*Awf reported: Once I approached Talhah. I saw him worried and 
asked him, "What's the matter?" He said, "The money which I 
possess is now so abundant that it worries me and makes me feel 
distressed." I told him, "Never mind, I'll distribute it." He set out to 
call people and to divide it among them till there wasn't a single 
dirham left. 


On another occasion, he sold his land for a very high price, 
and when he looked at the pile of money, his tears rolled down and 
he said, " A man in whose house all that money is to remain for a 
night and he doesn't know for sure what will happen to him is 
certainly deceived by Allah." 


Then he called some of his companions to carry his money 
with them and walk through the streets of Al-Madiinah distributing it 
until in the last part of the night he was without a single dirham of 
that money. 


282 


Jaabir Ibn “Abd Allah described his wealth saying, "I never saw 
anybody giving out so much money without being asked as did 
Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaid Allah.” 


He was one of the kindest toward his relatives and kin. He 
supported them all, though they were numerous. It was once said 
about him, "He never left an orphan without supporting him and his 
dependents. He provided for the marriage of the unmarried ones, he 
provided service for the disabled ones, and paid the debts of the 
indebted ones." 


As-Saa'i’b Ibn Zaid once said, “ I accompanied Talhah during 
travels and during times of settlement. I never saw anybody more 
generous in terms of money, clothes, and food than Talhah." 


The well known civil strife broke out during the caliphate of 
“‘Uthmaan. Talhah supported the argument of *Uthmaan's 
opponents, standing on their side in most of their quests to witness 
change and reformation. 


Did he therefore, in such a position, call for ‘Uthmaan's murder, 
or even feel pleased by it? Never! If he had known that the civil strife 
would develop in such a way, bursting into mad spite, expressing 
itself in such cruel crime, the victim of which was "The Man of Two 
Lights" ~“Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased with him)... We say, if he 
had known that the civil strife would in the long run lead to such an 
end and such a conflict, he would have resisted it, and it would 
have been resisted by the rest of the Companions who supported him 
at the beginning, recognizing it as a movement of opposition and 
warning, and no more. 


However, Talhah's stance turned out to be his "life conflict" 
after the brutal way in which 'Uthmaan was surrounded and killed. 
Imam ~Aliy had hardly accepted the oath of allegience from Talhah 
and Az-Zubair at Al-Madiinah, when they both asked permission to 
go to Makkah for ‘Umrah. 


283 


*. 


From Makkah they both turned to Al-Basrah, where a great 
multitude was gathering to avenge “Uthmaan's death. 


At last it was the Battle of Al-Jamal, where those calling for 
revenge met with the party supporting ~Aliy. 


Whenever “Aliy thought about this difficult situation which 
Islam and Muslims were confronting in this horrible dispute, he burst 
into sorrowful tears and his laments grew louder and louder. He was 
forced into this difficult situation. 


Being the Caliph of the Muslims, he could not and it was not 
his right to be tolerant towards any revolt against the state or any 
armed opposition to the established authority. To crush a rebellion 
of that sort, then, he had to face his brethren, his companions, friends 
and the followers of his Prophet and his religion, those with whom he 
had so often encountered and combated the polytheist armies and 
with whom he had so often joined under the standard of monotheism 
in battles that refined their Islamic behavior and melted away all 
weakness and disgrace, thereby turning them into brethren — and 
indeed brethren — supporting each other. 


What a conflicting situation! What a difficult harsh test! In 
order to find a way out of such a conflict and to save the blood of the 
Muslims, Imam ~“Aliy did his utmost. 


Nonetheless, the factors opposing Islam — and they were many 
— which had met their defeat at the hands of the Muslim state in the 
days of its great leader ‘Umar, had kindled the civil uprising and 
continued to stoke it and follow its events and magnitude. 


* * * 


He cried a lot and wept abundantly when he saw The Mother 
of the Faithful ~Aa'ishah on her camel howdah at the head of the 
army which rose to fight him. When he saw Talhah and Az-Zubair, 
the disciples of the Prophet (PBUH), he called to them to come out to 


284 


meet him, so they did. They approached him till their horses 
touched each other. He said to Talhah, "O Talhah! Did you come 
with the wife of the Messenger of Allah to use her in your fight while 
hiding your wife at home?" Then he said to Az-Zubair, "O Zubair! | 
ask you by Allah. Do you remember the day when the Prophet 
(PBUH) passed you when we were in such- and-such a place, then 
he said to you, ‘O Zubair! Do you love “Aliy?' You replied, 'Why 
shouldn't I love my nephew and cousin and the follower of my 
religion?’ He said to you, "O Zubair! By Allah, you will fight him, 
being unjust to him.'" 


Az-Zubair (May Allah be pleased with him) said, "Yes, now I 
remember, I had forgotten that. By Allah, I won't fight you.” 


Az-Zubair and Talhah abstained from taking part in this civil 
war. They abstained as soon as things were clarified. When they saw 
*Ammaar Ibn Yaasir fighting on ‘Aliy's side, they remembered the 
Prophet's prophecy to ~Ammaar: "You will be killed by the unjust 
party.” If ~Ammaar were killed in that war in which Talhah was 
taking part, then Talhah was unjust. 


* * * 


Talhah and Az-Zubair retreated from the whole fight and had 
to pay for that retreat with their lives. But they met Allah pleased 
and delighted with what they had been endowed by Allah: insight 
and guidance . 


As for Az-Zubair, a man named ‘Amr Ibn Jarmuuz followed 
him and killed him while he was praying. 


As for Talhah he was pierced with a lance by Marwaan Ibn Al- 
Hakim, which killed him on the spot. 


* * * 


285 


The murder of *Uthmaan represented in Talhah's conscience his 
"life conflict", as previously mentioned. Despite the fact that, he did 
not take part in the murder nor agree to it, he had just supported the 
opposition against him (-Aliy) at a time when it was not obvious that 
it would intensify and develop into a more serious conflict until it 
turned into a dreadful crime. 


When he took his place on the day of Al-Jamal amidst the army 
fighting against the Ibn Abi Taalib which sought to take revenge for 
“Uthmaan's murder, he wished that his position would be an 
atonement making him feel at ease towards the pressure of his 
conscience: Before the start of the battle he was supplicating with a 
voice choked with tears saying, "O my Lord, accept me this day in 
favor of ~Uthmaan until You are pleased." 


When they met ~Aliy face to face, he and Az-Zubair both said 
they felt illuminated by *Aliy's words and thereby saw it to be right 
to leave the battlefield. 


However, martyrdom had been reserved for them. Indeed, 
martyrdom was his fate, and he was to meet it and it was to meet 
him, wherever he was. 


Did not the Prophet (PBUH) once say about him, "He's one of 
those who passed away. Whoever wants to please himself by seeing 
a martyr walking on the earth, go let him look at Talhah." Thereby 
did the martyr meet his inevitable fate, and the Battle of Al-Jamal 
was over. The Mother of the Believers realized that she had made a 
hasty decision; therefore she left Al-Basrah for the Sacred House and 
then Al-Madiinah, keeping aloof from the fighting and dispute. Imam 
~Aliy provided her with all means of comfort and respect. 


When “Aliy inspected all the martyrs of the battle, he set out to 
pray the funeral prayer upon them, those who fought on his side as 
well as those who fought against him. 


When he finished burying Talhah and Az-Zubair, he stood 
saluting them for the last time. He finished his words saying, "I wish 


286 


to be with Talhah and Az-Zubair and ‘Uthmaan among those whom 
Allah described thus: <We removed from their hearts any malice 
therein, as brothers they shall rest upon couches facing each other 
>" (15: 47). 


Then he gazed at their grave with kind, gentle, pure, and sad 
eyes saying, "I've heard with my two ears the Prophet (PBUH) saying, 
Talhah and Az-Zubair are my neighbors in Paradise.’ " 


287 


(28) 
AZ -ZUBAIR IBN AL “AWAAM 
The Prophet's Disciple ! 


It is almost impossible to mention Talhah without mentioning 
Az-Zubair, too, and almost impossible to mention Az-Zubair 
without mentioning Talhah as well. 


When the Prophet (PBUH) was fraternizing with his 
Companions in Makkah before the Hijrah to Al-Madiinah, he 
fraternized with Talhah and Az-Zubair. 


The Prophet (PBUH) often talked about them together, for 
example in his statement "Talhah and Az-Zubair are my neighbors in 
Paradise." 


Both of them were linked to the Prophet (PBUH) through 
relationship and descent. As for Talhah, he is linked to the Prophet 
(PBUH) through Murah Ibn Ka’b. Zubair's lineage is linked to the 
Prophet through Qusaii Ibn Kulaab. In addition to that, his mother 
Safiah is the Prophet's paternal aunt. 


Talhah and Az-Zubair resembled each other tremendously in 
their fates. The similarity between them was enormous in terms of 
their upbringing, their wealth, their generosity, their religious 
solidarity, and their magnificent bravery. Both of them were early 
converts to Islam. Both of them were among the ten to whom 
Paradise was promised by the Prophet (PBUH) and among the six 
whom “Umar entrusted with the duty of choosing the next caliph 
following him. Even their destiny was one of complete similarity. In 
fact it was one destiny. 


* * * 


288 


As mentioned, Az-Zubair's embracement of Islam was an early 
one. Indeed, he was one of the first seven who quickened their steps 
towards Islam and played a role with the blessed early converts at 
Daar Al-Arqam. At that time he was 15 years old; that is how he 
was endowed with guidance, light, and all the good while still a 
youth. 


He was a horseman and a bold warrior from childhood, to the 
extent that historians mention that the first sword lifted in Islam was 
Az-Zubair's sword. 


In the very early days of Islam, while the Muslims were still few 
in number, hiding in Daar Al-Argam, a rumor spread that the 
Prophet (PBUH) had been killed. Az-Zubair had hardly heard that 
when he unsheathed his sword and hurried through the streets of 
Makkah although still so young. 


First he went to learn the truth of what had been said, 
determined that if it were true, he would cut the whole of the 
Quraish into pieces until they killed him. 


On the high hills of Makkah, the Prophet (PBUH) met him and 
asked, “What's the matter?" Az-Zubair told him the news. The 
Prophet (PBUH) prayed for him and asked Allah to bestow mercy 
and all good upon him, and victory upon his sword. 


Despite Az-Zubair's nobility among his clan, he had to carry the 
burden of the Quraish's persecution and torment. It was his uncle 
who was in charge of his torture. He wrapped him in a mat, set it on 
fire to let him suffocate, and called to him while he was under the 
pressure of severe torture, "Disbelieve in Muhammad's Lord and | 
will ward off this torture." 


Az-Zubair, who was at that time no more than a growing 
youth, replied in a horrible challenging way, "No! By Allah, I won't 
return to polytheism ever again." 


289 


Az-Zubair emigrated to Abyssinia twice, in the first and second 
migrations. Then he returned to take part in the battles with the 
Prophet (PBUH). No raid or battle ever missed him. 


Plentiful were the stabs which his body had to receive and 
preserve even after his wounds had been healed. They were like 
medals telling of Az-Zubair's heroism and glory. 


Let us listen to one of his companions, who once saw and 
described these medals, which crowded each other over his body: 
While accompanying Az- Zubair in one of his journeys, I saw his 
body spotted with sword scars. His chest was like hollow eyes due 
to the variety of stabs and wounds. I said to him, "I've seen on your 
body what I've never seen before." He replied, "By Allah, I haven't 
received one of them except while I was with the Prophet (PBUH) 
and in the cause of Allah." 


During the Battle of Uhud, after the army of the Quraish had 
retreated towards Makkah, the Prophet (PBUH) assigned him 
together with Abu Bakr to follow the Quraish's army and to chase 
them so they would realize how strong the Muslim party was and 
would not think of reattacking Al-Madiinah and continuing the fight. 


Abu Bakr and Az-Zubair led 70 Muslims. Although they were 
chasing a victorious army, the military skill used by As-Siddiiq and 
Az-Zubair, made the Quraish think that they had overestimated the 
losses of the Muslim party. They thought that the powerful front 
row, whose strength Az-Zubair and As-Siddiiq successfully 
demonstrated, was nothing other than the advance guard of the 
Prophet's army, which seemed to approach in order to launch a 
horrible pursuit. The Quraish hastened away and quickened their 
pace towards Makkah. 


On the Day of Al-Yarmuuk, Az-Zubair was an army in himself. 
When he saw most of the warriors under his command moving 
backwards when they saw the huge advancing Roman “mountains”, 
he cried, “Allahu akbar! Allah is the greatest!" With a sharp striking 


sword he burst alone into those advancing "mountains", then he 
retreated, then penetrated the same horrible rows with his sword in 
his right hand, never tripping nor slipping. 


May Allah be pleased with him who was so much in love with 
martyrdom, full of enthusiasm for dying in the cause of Allah. He 
said, “Talhah gives his sons names of the Prophets and he knows 
there is no prophet after Muhammad (PBUH). But I give my sons the 
names of martyrs, and may they die as martyrs !" 


In this way he named one son ‘Abd Allah asa good omen, after 
the martyr Companion “Abd Allah Ibn Jahsh; another he named Al- 
Mundhir after the martyr Companion Al-Mundhir Ibn ‘Amr; another 
he named “Urwah after the martyr Companion *‘Urwah Ibn ‘Amr; 
another he called Hamzah after the martyr Companion Hamzah Ibn 
Abi Taalib; another he called Ja‘far after the martyr Companion 
Ja‘far Ibn Abi Taalib; another he called Mus‘ab after the martyr 
Companion Mus*ab Ibn “Umair and another he called Khaalid after 
the martyr Companion Khaalid Ibn Sa‘iid . 


In this way he chose for his sons the names of martyrs, hoping 
that they would all die martyrs. 


It is mentioned in his biography that he never held a 
governorship, nor the task of collecting taxes or tribute, but only the 
task of fighting in the cause of Allah. 


His merit as a warrior can be seen in his total self-reliance and 
his complete self-confidence. 


Even if 100,000 warriors were to join him in combat, you would 
still see him fighting as if standing alone on the battlefield, and as if 
the responsibility of fighting and for victory rested on him alone. 


His merit as a warrior is represented in his firmness and the 
strength of his nerves. 


291 


He saw his uncle Hamzah on the Day of Uhud: the polytheists 
had cut his corpse into pieces in a dreadful way. He stood in front of 
him like a high firm rooted mountain, gritting his teeth while holding 
his sword tightly, having nothing in mind except a horrible revenge. 
Soon, however, a divine revelation prohibited the Prophet (PBUH) 
and the Muslims from even the slightest thought of such a thing. 


When the Bani Quraidhah siege lasted a long period without 
their surrender, the Prophet (PBUH) sent him with “Aliy Ibn Abi 
Taalib. There in front of the unsurmountable fortress he stood and 
repeated several times, “By Allah ! We will taste what Hamzah 
tasted or we will open their fortress." Then they two alone threw 
themselves into the fortress. 


With admirable strong nerves, they were able to terrify the 
besieged inside it and to open its gates. 


On the Day of Hunain he could see Maalik Ibn “Awf, leader the 
of Hawaazin and of the polytheist army, after his defeat in Hunain 
standing in the midst of some of his companions and the remnants of 
his defeated army. He burst alone into their midst and single- 
handedly scattered them and pushed them away from the place of 
ambush from which they kept an eye on the Muslim leaders who were 
returning from the battlefield. 


+ + * 


His share of the Prophet's love and appreciation was great. 
The Prophet (PBUH) was so proud of him that he said, “Every 
prophet has a disciple, and my disciple is Az-Zubair Ibn Al- 
*~Awaam." He was not only his cousin and the husband of Asmaa' 
Bint Abu Bakr ("The Lady of the Two Belts") but, moreover, he was 
the powerful, loyal, brave, bold, generous, and bountiful, who gave 
away and devoted his life and money for Allah, Lord of all the 
worlds. 


292 


His characteristics were noble, his good qualities great. His 
bravery and generosity were always parallel to each other. He 
managed a successful trade, and his fortune was enormous; however, 
he spent all of that in the cause of Islam until he died in debt. His 
trust in Allah was the reason behind his generosity, bravery, and 
redemption. 


Even when he generously gave up his soul, he asked his son to 
pay his debt. "If you're unable to pay it, then seek my Master's help.” 
“Abd Allah asked him, " Which master do you mean?" He answered, 
“Allah. He is the best Guardian, the best Helper." ~Abd Allah said 
afterwards, "By Allah I never fell into trouble because of his debt. I 
only said, 'O Master of Zubair, pay his debt,’ so He did." 


On the Day of Al-Jamal, and in the same way previously 
mentioned about Talhah, was Az-Zubair's end and fate. After he saw 
it right to refrain from fighting, a group of those who had been keen 
to see the flames of civil strife continuously raging and never 
extinguished followed him. A treacherous murderer stabbed him 
while he was praying and standing between the hands of Allah. 


The murderer went to Imam “Aliy, thinking that he would be 
announcing to him good news when telling him about his attack upon 
Az-Zubair and when putting into his hands the sword which he had 
stolen from him after committing his crime. When “Aliy knew that 
Az-Zubair's murderer was standing at his door asking permission to 
enter, he shouted ordering that he be expelled and said, "Announce 
Hell to the murderer of Safiah's son!". When they showed him Az- 
Zubair's sword, Imam “Aliy kissed it and then cried painfully saying, 
"A sword whose owner had so long wiped the Prophet's grief.” 


* * * 
Is there a better, more wonderful and eloquent salute to be 


directed to Az-Zubair at the end of our talk than the words of Imam 
“Aliy? 


293 


May peace be upon Az-Zubair in death after his life. Peaceful 
greeting after peaceful greeting upon the Prophet's disciple. 


294 


(29) 
KHUBAIB IBN “ADIY 
A Hero on the Cross ! 


And now, pave the way for this hero. Come nearer from all 
directions, from everywhere. Come in any way you can and strive 
your utmost, come hurrying and submitting. Approach in order to be 
taught the lesson of sacrifice, an incomparable lesson. You will say, 
Weren't all the stories you have previously told lessons of 
incomparable sacrifice? 


Indeed, they were lesson of uncomparable magnificence. 
Nothing whatsoever can be similar to it. However, you are now in 
front of a new master illustrating the art of sacrifice, a figure who, if 
you miss meeting him, then you have missed a great deal, indeed a 
great deal. Come to us, all people of faith in every nation and 
country. Come to us, lovers of exaltedness in every period and era. 
And you, too, who carry a heavy burden of illusion and you whose 
belief in creed and religions is one of falsehood and error. Come with 
your illusion. Come and see how Allah's religion built men. Come and 
see what glory, what strength, what firmness, what determination, 
what sacrifice, what loyalty! 


To sum up, what extraordinary and amazing greatness has been 
granted by the belief in truth to its sincere followers. 


Can you see the crucified body? It is our lesson today — to all 
mankind! Indeed, the crucified body in front of you is our subject, 
our lesson, our master. His name is Khubaib Ibn “Adiy. Remember 
this name well! 


Remember it, sing it, it is an honor for anyone belonging to any 
religion, to any sect, belonging to any ethnic group and living in any 
era! 


He belonged to the Aws tribe from Al-Madiinah. He belonged 
to the Ansaar. 


Since the day of the Prophet's Hijrah to Al-Madiinah and since 
the day of his belief in Allah, Lord of the Worlds, he frequently 
visited the Prophet (PBUH). 


His soul, spirit, and conscience were pure, and his belief was 
firm. He was described by Hassaan Ibn Thaabit, Islam's poet: "He 
looked like a falcon among the Ansaar. Allah endowed him with 
noble character and good morals." 


When the standards of the Battle of Badr were lifted, he was 
there, a bold warrior and a daring fighter. Among the polytheists 
whom he killed with his sword during the battle was Al-Haarith Ibn 
“Aamir Ibn Nawfal. 


After the battle was over and the defeated remnants of the 
Quraish had returned to Makkah, the sons of Al-Haarith learned that 
their father had been killed. They learned the name of his killer very 
well by heart: Khubaib Ibn *Adiy. 


* * * 


The Muslims returned from Badr to Al-Madiinah and 
persistently built their new community. Khubaib was a true 
worshiper, a pious devotee, carrying the nature of a devotee and the 
longing aspiration of a worshiper. There he turned to worship with 
the spirit of a passionate lover, praying at night, fasting during the 
day, glorifying Allah, Lord of the Worlds. 


* * * 


One day the Prophet (PBUH) wanted to know the Quraish's 
secrets so as to be fully aware of the target of their movements and 
any preparations for a new battle. Therefore, he chose ten of his 
Companions, among whom was Khubaib, and *Aasim Ibn Thaabit as 
leader. 


296 


The expedition set off towards its destination until they 
reached a place between ‘Asafaan and Makkah. News of them 
reached an area of Hudhail called Bani Hayaan. They hastened to 
them with 100 of their most skillful spearmen. They set out to pursue 
them and to follow their tracks. 


They almost lost them but for the fact that one of them found 
some discarded date pits on the sand. He picked them up and, with 
the amazing skill Arabs were famous for, glanced at them, then 
shouted loudly so that the others could hear him, "They are date 
pits from Yathrib*. Let's follow them and they will surely guide us." 
They followed the discarded date pits until they could see in the 
distance what they were searching for. 


*Aasim, the expedition's leader, felt that they were being 
chased, so he ordered his companions to mount the high peak of a 
mountain. The 100 spearmen approached and surrounded the foot 
of the mountain and besieged them thoroughly. 


They asked them to surrender themselves after giving them their 
word not to hurt them. The ten turned to their leader, ‘Aasim Ibn 
Thaabit Al-Angaariy (May Allah be pleased with them all), and 
waited for his command. He then said, "As for me, by Allah, I will 
never let myself fall into the protection of a polytheist. May Allah 
inform our Prophet about us.” 


The spearmen then began to throw their spears at them. Their 
leader ~Aasim was wounded and died as a martyr. In the same way 
seven others were wounded and died as martyrs. 


The rest were then called and promised that they would be safe 


if they came down. The three descended, Khubaib and his two 
friends. The spearmen approached Khubaib and his companion, 


297 


Zaid Ibn Ad-Dithinnah, and tied them up. Their third one 
recognized the beginning of their deceipts, so he decided to die there 
where “Aasim and his companions had fallen. He died where he 
wished. 


That is how some of the greatest, most faithful, most loyal to 
Allah and his Prophet (PBUH), and most sincere believers passed 
away. Khubaib and Zaid tried to untie themselves, but they were 
tied very thoroughly and tightly. 


The deceptive spearmen took them to Makkah where they sold 
them to the polytheists. The name of Khubaib reached everyone's ear. 
The sons of Al-Haarith Ibn “Aamir, who had been killed in Badr, 
remembered his name very well and were moved by spite and hatred. 
They hurried to buy him. Most of the inhabitants of Makkah, who 
had lost their fathers and leaders in the Battle of Badr, competed in 
purchasing him in order to take revenge. They enjoined each other to 
take revenge on him and commenced to prepare him for a fate to 
satisfy their desire for revenge, not directed at him, as such, but at 
all the Muslims. 

Some other people took Khubaib's companion Zaid Ibn Ad- 
Dithinnah and set out to torture him severely. 


* * * 


Khubaib submitted his heart, his whole life, and destiny to 
Allah, Lord of the Worlds. He turned to His worship with a firm 
soul, unruffled and fearless, accompanied by a divine tranquility. 
Even hard, solid mountain rocks and terror itself might melt and 
simply vanish due to it. 


Allah was with him, and he was with Allah. Allah's hand was 
over him, and he could almost feel His fingers within his chest. 


One day, one of Al-Haarith's daughters entered where he was 
kept as a captive at Al-Haarith's house. She quickly hurried out, 
calling the people to see an unbelievable thing! "By Allah, I saw him 


298 


holding a big bunch of grapes, eating from it while being fettered with 
iron chains — at a time when there isn't a single grape in Makkah. I 
can't think of it except as being a blessing from Allah!" 


Indeed, it was a blessing given by Allah to His virtuous 
worshiper, as He gave to Maryam (Mary, mother of Jesus) daughter 
of “Imraan before: < Whenever Zakariya entered the sanctuary he 
found her furnished with provision, he said, ”"O Mary from where did 
you get this?” She said. "It is from GOD, surely GOD provides who 
He pleases without measure” > (3 : 37). 


* + + 


The polytheists brought him the news of the death of his 
companion Zaid Ibn Ad-Dithinnah (May Allah be pleased with him). 
They hoped thereby to break down his nerves. However, they did 
not know that Allah, the Most Merciful, had invited him into His 
hospitality, blessing him with divine tranquility and mercy. 


They set out to bargain with him over his faith, promising to 
save his life if he disbelieved in Muhammad and his Lord, but they 
were like children trying to catch the sun by a mere arrow-shot. 


Indeed, Khubaib's faith was like the sun in its strength, flame, 
light, and far-reachedness. He shed light upon those seeking light and 
warmed those seeking warmth, but the one who approached him to 
challenge him would be burned and destroyed. 


When they lost hope of reaching their desire, they took the hero 
to face his destiny. They took him to a place called At- Tan*iim, 
where he would be killed. 


As soon as they reached this place, Khubaib asked them to 
allow him to pray two rak‘ahs. They allowed him with the hope that 
he would make up his mind to announce his surrender and disbelief 
in Allah, His Messenger and His religion. 


299 


Solemnly, peacefully and humbly Khubaib prayed two rak‘ahs. 
He felt the sweetness of faith within his soul, so that he wished that 
he could keep on praying and praying. However, he turned toward 
his killers and said to them, “By Allah, were it not for your thinking 
that I'm afraid of death, I would have continued praying." Then he 
lifted his hands towards the sky and said, "O Allah! Count them one 
by one and then perish them all!" Then he scanned their faces 
intently and set out singing: 


When I am being martyred as a Muslim, 
I do not care in what way I receive my death 


For Allah's sake. 
If He wishes, 
He will bless the cut limbs. 
* * * 


It was perhaps the first time in Arab history to crucify a man 
then kill him on the cross. They had prepared out of palm tree trunks 
a huge cross on which they fixed Khubaib, his limbs tied tightly. The 
polytheists gathered in obvious glee at his suffering while spearmen 
prepared their lances. 


All that cruelty was intentionally performed slowly in front of 
the crucified hero. He did not close his eyes, and amazing tranquility 
beamed from his face. Then spears began to skirmish and swords to 
tear his flesh into pieces. 


One of the Quraish leaders approached him saying, "Would 
you like Muhammad to be in your place and you be healthy and 
secure among your kin?" 


Only then did Khubaib burst like a thunderstorm, shouting to 
his killers, "By Allah, I woud not like to be among my relatives and 
sons enjoying all the world's health and well-being while even a tiny 
thorn hurts the Prophet." 


300 


They were the same great words spoken by Zaid Ibn Ad- 
Dithinnah when he was being killed! The same amazing, dazzling 
strong words Zaid said one day before they were said by Khubaib. 
At that, Abu Sufyaan, who had not yet embraced Islam, had to shake 
his head and say astonished, "By Allah! I've never seen anybody love 
somebody else the way Muhammad's companions love Muhammad." 


* * +* 


Khubaib's words were so provocative that the spears and 
swords began to tear the hero's body to pieces, attacking it with 
complete madness and cruelty. 


Not far away from the scene, birds and buzzards were flying 
around as if waiting for the butchers to end their task and leave the 
spot so that they could approach the fresh dead body to have a 
delicious meal. However, soon they called to one another and 
gathered, and their beaks moved as if whispering and talking. 


Suddenly they flew away in the sky, far, far away. They 
smelled by their instinct the scent of a pious, repentant man which 
spread from his crucified body, so they were ashamed to approach 
him or to hurt him. The flock of birds flew away, just and pure, into 
the vastness of space. 


The group of malicious polytheists returned to their dens in 
Makkah while the dead body of the martyr stayed there, guarded by 
a group of Quraishi spearmen. 


When they were lifting Khubaib onto the palm trunk cross and 
tying him firmly, Khubaib turned his face towards the sky asking his 
Ever Manigifcent Lord, "Allah! We fulfilled the mission of Your 
Messenger. Inform him in the early morning of what is happening to 


WwW 


us. 


301 


Allah responded to his prayer. While he was in Al-Madiinah, 
the Prophet (PBUH) was filled with a strong feeling that his 
Companions were facing a severe trial, and he could almost see the 
crucified dead body of one of them. 


Immediately the Prophet (PBUH) sent for Al-Miqdaad Ibn 
“Amr and Az-Zubair Ibn Al--Awaam. They mounted their horses 
and set off to cross the land rapidly. Allah guided them to their 
desired destination. They lowered Khubaib's body to a pure spot of 
ground waiting to shelter him under its moist soil. 


* * + 


No one knows to this day where Khubaib's grave lies. Maybe 
that is better and more respectable for him so that he remains in 
history's memory and in the conscience of life a hero, a hero on the 
cross. 


302 


(30) 
*UMAIR IBN SA*D 
The Matchless! 


Do you remember Sa‘iid Ibn ‘Aamir ? That ascetic and steady 
worshiper who was forced by the Commander of the Faithful “Umar 
to accept the governorship of Syria? 


We spoke about him in the first part of this book, and we saw 
the wonder of wonders while talking about his asceticism, his 
renouncement of all worldly pleasure, and his piety. 


But now we will meet on these pages a brother of his, better to 
say a twin brother, an identical twin in terms of piety, asceticim, 
elevation and greatness of soul, which is actually incomparable. 


It is ‘Umair Ibn Sa‘d. He was called by the Muslims "The 
Matchless". What do you think about a man about whom there was a 
public consensus that he deserved that title, a consensus of the 
Prophet's Companions, with all the merit, enlightment, and intellect 
they possessed? 


His father was Sa‘d, the reciter (May Allah be pleased with 
him). He experienced the Battle of Badr with the Messenger of Allah 
and all the following events and stayed loyal to his oath till he 
passed away as a martyr in the Battle of Al-Qaadisiyah.* 


* In Sirat Ibn Hishaam, p. 519, Vol. 1. The Halaby Second edition, it was 
mentioned that Sa*d's father was someone else, who died while the 
Prophet (PBUH) was still alive before the Battle of Tabuuk. But Ibn Sad 


mentioned in At- Tabaqaat Al-Kubrah, Vol. 4, p. 324. Beirut Edition, that 
his father was Sa’d the reciter and we hold that opinion. 


He brought his son with him to the Prophet (PBUH) to swear 
the oath of allegiance and to embrace Islam. 


From the day “Umair embraced Islam, he turned into a 
worshiper dwelling at Allah's mihrab (prayer niche), escaping and 
running away from the lights of fame, withdrawing to the tranquility 
and calmness of shadow. 


It is absolutely out of the question that you find him in the front 
rows, except the row of prayer — he stations himself in the front row 
to be granted the reward of the highest in faith — and the rows of 
jihaad — he hastens to the front row, hoping to be one of the martyrs. 


Other than that, he is dedicated to attaining righteousness, 
piety, and virtue. He is a returner to Allah, weeping for his sins! He 
is a devotee to Allah, hoping to be accepted as a faithful returner to 
Him ! He is a traveler to Allah in all journeys and all instances. 


* + * 


Allah blessed him with his companions’ love for him. He was 
the delight of their eyes and the darling of their hearts. That was 
because of his strong, firm belief, his pure soul, his calm nature, the 
scent of his good qualities, and his beaming appearance. All that 
made him the joy and pleasure of all those who met or saw him. 


No one and nothing whatsoever was superior to his religion. He 
once heard Julaas Ibn Suwaid Ibn As-Saamit, one of his close 
relatives, saying, "If the man is truthful, then we've more evil than 
mules!" He meant by “the man" the Prophet (PBUH). Julaas was one 
of those who embraced Islam out of fear. 


When *Umair heard that statement, his calm, quiet spirit burst 
into anger and confusion. Anger because one of those who pretended 
to be a Muslim had insulted the Prophet by this wicked language. 


Confusion because a lot of thoughts came quickly to his mind, 


304 


all revolving around his responsibility towards what he had just 
heard and denied. 


Should he communicate all that he had heard to the Prophet? 
How, and what about the trustworthiness of private meetings? 
Should he keep silent and leave what he had heard within his breast? 
How? And where was his loyalty to the Prophet (PBUH) who was 
sent by Allah to guide them after having lived astray and to 
illuminate them after having lived in darkness? 


However, his confusion did not last long. The truthfulness to 
himself helped him to find a way out. “Umair immediately behaved 
like a strong man and a pious believer. He turned to Julaas Ibn 
Suwaid, "O Julaas, by Allah, you're one of the most beloved to 
myself and the last one I would like to see afflicted by something he 
dislikes. You've now said something that if I spread it around, it 
would harm you; if I keep silent, I would ruin my religion, and the 
fulfillment of duty towards religion has priority. So I'm going to 
inform the Messenger of Allah what you've said!" 


Here ‘Umair pleased his pious conscience completely. First, he 
fulfilled the duty of preserving the trustworthiness of private talks 
and elevated his great noble soul away from the role of a slandering 
listener. Second, he fulfilled his duty towards his religion and shed 
light on a suspicious hypocrite. Third, he gave Julaas a chance to 
reconsider his fault and to ask Allah for forgiveness. If he had done 
that straightforwardly, then his conscience would have found peace, 
because it would not have been necessary any more to inform the 
Prophet (PBUH). 


However, Julaas's pride made him hold to his falsehood. His 
lips did not spell out the word "sorry" nor any other apology. ‘Umair 
left him saying, "I will inform the Prophet (PBUH) before a revelation 
makes me a partner of your sin." 


The Prophet (PBUH) sent for Julaas, who denied and moreover 
swore by Allah that he had not said that! However, a Qur’aanic 


305 


verse demonstrated clearly the true and the false: <They swear by 
GOD that they said nothing, but they indeed uttered the word of 
unbelief, and disbelieved after they had become Muslims, and they 
intended a plot but could not accomplish what they intended and 
they only showed hostility towards Islam after GOD and His 
Messenger had enriched them out of His Bounty, so if they repent it 
will be better for them, so if they turn away, GOD will chastise 
them with a painful chastisement in this world and the Hereafter, 
and on earth there will be none to protect or help them > (9 : 74). 


Julaas found himself forced to confess his fault and to 
apologize, especially when he heard the holy verse which accused 
him, promising him at the same moment Allah's mercy if he repented 
and refrained from that: < So if they repent it will be better for them 
>. 


“Umair's action was a blessing for Julass. Thus Julaas repented 
and his Islamic conduct turned to be more righteous than before. The 
Prophet (PBUH) held his ear and praised him, "O my boy! Your ear 
was loyal and your Lord believed you.” 


*% * * 


I was delighted when I met “Umair for the first time four years 
ago while composing my book Between the Hands of ‘Umar. | was 
amazed. Nothing could amaze me so much as what happened 
between him and the Commander of the Faithful. I am going to 
narrate to you that event for you to enjoy with me "excellence" in its 
most precious and magnificent form. 


* * * 


You all know that the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Umar (May 
Allah be pleased with him) chose his governors very cautiously as if 
choosing his destiny. He always chose them from among the ascetic, 
pious, honest, and truthful: those who escaped from power and 
authority and would not accept it unless forced by the Commander 
of the Faithful to do so. 


306 


Despite his unerring insight and his overwhelming experience, he 
was very deliberate when choosing his governors and counselors, 
dealing scrupulously with his decision. 


He never stopped his famous statement: "I need a man who, if 
among his clan would seem to be their prince while he isn't so in 
reality, and who, if among them would seem to be an ordinary one 
while being their prince in reality. I need a governor who won't favor 
himself above the other people in terms of clothing, food, or dwelling; 
who will lead them in their prayers, distribute their dues among them 
fairly, and rule them justly, never shutting his door leaving their 
needs and wishes unfulfilled. 


According to these strict requisites he chose “Umair Ibn Sa‘d to 
be a governor over Homs. “Umair tried to free himself of that task 
and to save himself, but the Commander of the Faithful obligated him 
and imposed it upon him forcefully. “Umair asked Allah for proper 
guidance. Then he went to carry out his duty and task. 


In Homs, a whole year passed and no land tax reached Al- 
Madiinah, nor did a single message reach the Commander of the 
Faithful. The Commander of the Faithful called his scribe, to whom 
he said, "Write to ‘Umair ordering him to come here." 


Will you allow me to tell you about the meeting between “Umar 
and ‘Umair as it was related in my previous book Between the Hands 
of “Umar? * 


One day the roads of Al-Madiinah witnessed a dusty, shaggy 
man, covered by the hardship of travel and hardly pulling his feet 
out from the hot sandy ground due to his long suffering and the 
tremendous effort he spent. On his left shoulder there was a sack 


* The first edition appeared in June 1964 


and a wooden bowl. On his right shoulder there was a small 
waterskin filled with water. He supported his thin, weak, tired body 
with a stick. 


He turned to ‘Umar's assembly with very slow, heavy steps. 
“O Commander of the Faithful, peace be upon you." 


“Umar replied. Deeply afflicted by the scene of his weakness 
and overexertion, he asked him, "What's wrong with you , “Umair?" 


"Can't you see I'm healthy, possessing a pure conscience and 
possessing the whole world?" 


‘Umar asked, "What do you have with you?" 
“Umair replied, "I've a sack in which I carry my food, a bowl in 
which I eat, my utensils for my ablution and drink, and a stick to 


lean on and fight an enemy if he crosses my way. By Allah, the whole 
world is an obedient slave of my belongings." 


"Did you come walking on foot?" "Yes." 


"Didn't you find anyone who would give you an animal to ride 
on?" 


"They didn't offer and I didn't ask them." 

"What did you do with what we charged you with 2” 

"I went to the country to which you sent me. There I gathered 
all its virtuous inhabitants and made them in charge of levying the 
taxes, so when they did that I put the money there where it belongs. If 


anything had remained I would have sent it to you." 


"Didn't you bring us anything?" 
"No. 


308 


Hereby “Umar shouted, amazed and happy, "Reappoint 
“Umair." But “Umair replied with complete composure, "Those were 
old days. I won't work for you or for anyone else!" 


This scene is not a written drama nor an invented 
conversation. It is a historical event * witnessed by the soil of Al- 
Madiinah, the old capital of Islam during great unforgotten days. 
What kind of men were those unparalleled, elevated ones! 


* * * 


“Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) was always wishing 
How much do I wish to have men like “Umair to assist me in ruling 
the Muslims! 


That was because “Umair, who had been fairly described by his 
companions as being "The Matchless", could prove superiority over 
all human weakness caused by our material existence and our thorny 
life. 


When this great saint was destined to face the test of power 
and authority, his piety was not afflicted. It rather became more 
elevated, raised beaming and bright. 


When he was Governor of Homs, he drew a clear picture of the 
tasks of a Muslim ruler. How often did his words from the pulpit 
shake the multitude of Muslims: "Islam is a well-fortified wall and a 
firm gate. As for the wall, that's justice; and the gate is truth. If the 
wall is torn down and the gate destroyed, then Islam loses its 
protective strength. Islam remains well-fortified as long as its reign is 
mighty. The might of its reign cannot be realized by killing with 
swords or by slashing with whips; rather by the fulfilment of truth 
and justice!” 


fundamental sources. 


Now we greet ‘Umair for the last time, greeting him with 
humility and respect. Let us bow our heads for the best tutor, 
Muhammad, the Imam of all the pious, Muhammad, Allah's mercy 
sent to the people in the midst of the heat and drought of life. 


May Allah's peace be upon him, may Allah's mercy be upon 
him, may Allah's salutations be unto him, may Allah's blessings be 
upon him, and peace be upon all pious ones and peace be upon all 
his righteous Companions. 


(31) 
ZAID IBN THAABIT 
The Compiler of Qur'aan ! 


If you hold the Holy Qur'aan with your right hand and 
concentrate your eyes upon it, and go on applying yourself eagerly 
and meticulously to its verdant meadows, chapter by chapter, verse 
by verse, remember that among those who deserve all gratitude and 


appreciation for such an accomplishment is a great venerable called 
Zaid Ibn Thaabit. 


The event of compiling the Qur'aan into one Holy Book is only 
mentioned in relation with that great Companion. 


When roses of honor are scattered on the day of remembrance 
of all the blessed ones who deserve credit for the compilation and 
preservation of the Qur'aan and putting it into its right order, Ibn 
Thaabit's share of those roses will be the greatest. 


* * * 


He was an Ansgaar from Al-Madiinah. When the Prophet 
(PBUH) reached Al-Madiinah in his Hijrah, Zaid was eleven years 
old. The young boy embraced Islam together with the Muslims of his 
clan and was then blessed by a prophetic supplication of Allah. 


His father took him to take part in the Battle of Badr, but the 
Prophet sent him back because of his tender age and body. 


On the day of Uhud, Zaid went with a group of veterans to the 
Prophet (PBUH), begging humbly to be accepted into any of the 
veteran ranks. Their relatives were more insistent, begging and 
hoping. The Prophet (PBUH) took a thankful look at the young 
horseman, seeming as if he was going to apologize for not 
recruiting them in this battle also. However, one of them, Raafi' Ibn 


Khudaij, approached the Prophet (PBUH) holding a lance, moving it 
skillfully with his right hand. He then said to the Prophet (PBUH), 
"As you can see, I am a spearman. I can throw very well. Please let 
me |" 


The Prophet (PBUH) greeted the mature and energetic young 
man with a delightful smile, then he allowed him. The blood burst 
into the veins of his peers. 


The second who approached was Samurah Ibn Jundub, who set 
off waving with this strong hands so that some of his relatives said to 
the Prophet,"Samurah will kill Raafi’.". The Prophet (PBUH) greeted 
him with a kind smile and allowed him. 


Both Samurah and Raafi™ were already 15 years old, with 
strong manly shapes. Six of the young peers were left, among them 
Zaid Ibn Thaabit and ~Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar. They set out to do their 
best, humbly begging the first time, weeping and crying the second 
time, and flexing their muscles the third time. However, they were too 
young and their bodies were still unripe, so the Prophet (PBUH) 
promised them to take part in the next battle. 


That is why Zaid Ibn Thaabit began to play the role of a warrior 
in the cause of Allah on the Day of Al-Khandaq, in A.H. 5. 


His believing, faithful personality was developing rapidly and 
amazingly. He was not just proficient as a warrior but also as an 
intellectual possessing various different merits. He followed up the 
Qur'aanic revelation, learning it by heart, writing it for the Prophet 
(PBUH), proving to be exquisite in terms of knowledge and wisdom. 
When the Prophet (PBUH) began to proclaim his message to the outer 
world and to send his messages to kings and emperors, he ordered 
Zaid to get acquainted with some of their languages, which is what he 
actually did in a very short time. 


In this way Zaid Ibn Thaabit's personality became brighter and 
occupied a high position in the newly built society and became 
subject to Muslims’ respect and honor. 


312 


Ash- Sha*biy reported: Zaid Ibn Thaabit set out to ride, so Ibn 
“Abbaas held the bridle. Zaid said to him, "O cousin of the Prophet 
(PBUH), let me pass." Ibn ~Abbaas replied, "No, it's the way we 
treat our “Ulamaa (scholars)." 


Qabaisah reported: Zaid was Al-Madiinah's most superior one 
in the field of judgment, jurisprudence, reciting, and the knowledge of 
obligatory duties. 


Thaabit Ibn “Ubaid reported, "I've never seen a more cheerful 
man at home and a more respectable one at his assembly than Zaid.” 


Ibn “Abbas said, "The tutors of Qur'aanic recitation among the 
Companions of the Prophet knew that Zaid was one of those deenly 
rooted in knowledge." 


All these qualities by which Zaid was described by the 
Prophet's Companions make us more acquainted with the person. 
Destiny would endow him with the honor of the assignment 
considered to be one of the most noble tasks in the entire Islamic 
history, the task of compiling the Qur'aan. 


* * * 


Since the divine revelation began to be revealed upon the 
Prophet's heart, he would be one of the warners. The message of the 
Qur'aan and the call to Allah started with these manificent verses: 
<Read: In the Name of your Lord Who created - created mankind 
from something which clings; Read ! And your Lord is the Most 
Noble; Who taught by the pen, Taught mankind what he did not 
know > (96: 1 - 5). 


Since the time the revelation started, the Prophet (PBUH) 
turned his face towards Allah, asking for his further enlightment and 
guidance. 


During all the years of the Islamic revelation, when the Prophet 
ended a battle to begin another one; and when he foiled his enemies’ 


313 


conspiracies and plans only to encounter a new foe and another and 
then another; when he was seriously building a new world, with all 
that seriousness means, the Qur'aan was sent down and the Prophet 
(PBUH) recited and proclaimed it. While there was a small blessed 
group moved by its keen interest in the Qur'aan from the very first 
day, some of them set out to learn what they could by heart, and 
others, who were talented in writing, set out to preserve the written 
verses. 


During the course of almost 23 years the Qur'aan was sent 
down verse by verse, or some verses following other verses, 
responding to various circumstances and instances, while those 
reciters and scribes went on fulfilling their task with great success. 


The Qur'aan was not sent down as a whole; thus it was not a 
composed book nor an invented one. It is rather a guide for a new 
nation built in reality, step by step, day after day. Its faith is 
promoted and its heart, mind, and determination are shaped 
according to a divine will, a will not imposed from above, but rather 
by means of a total conviction in this divine will. That is how the 
human conduct of this nation is going to be guided. 


Therefore, the revelation of the Qur'aan had to be piecemeal, in 
order to follow up the growth and advancement of such conduct 
and its ever changing situations and challenging difficulties.” 


Reciters as well as scribes competed and turned to recite the 
Qur'aan and to write it down. Leading them were ~Aliy Ibn Abi 
Taalib, Ubaiy Ibn K*ab, “Abd Allah Ibn Mas*uud, “Abd Allah Ibn 
~Abbaas, and the honorable Companion we are talking about right 
now, Zaid Ibn Thaabit (May Allah be pleased with them all). 


* * * 


* See our book, As Mentioned by the Qur'aan. 


After it had been completely revealed and during the last 
period of revelation, the Prophet (PBUH) recited it to the Muslims 
with its chapters and verses put in order. 


After the Prophet's death (PBUH) the Muslims were busy with 
the apostate battles. 


During the Battle of Al-Yamaamah — which was mentioned 
when we talked about Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid and Zaid Ibn Al- 
Khattaab — the number of reciters who died as martyrs was 
tremendous. The flames of war had hardly died down when ‘Umar 
hurried to Caliph Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq (May Allah be pleased with 
him) asking him insistingly to compile the Qur'aan quickly before the 
temaining reciters and scribes of the Qur'aan passed away. 


The caliph asked Allah for guidance and consulted his 
companions, then sent for Zaid Ibn Thaabit and told him, "You're a 
rational youth, in whom we find no faults." Then he ordered him to 
begin compiling the Qur'aan, assisted by people of experience in that 
matter. Zaid carried on his work, upon which the whole destiny of 
Islam as a religion depended. 


He stood the test in accomplishing the most difficult and crucial 
task. He went on compiling the chapters and verses from the reciters' 
memories and from the written work comparing , refuting and 
investigating until he could gather the whole Qur'aan and put it in 
order. 


His success was attested to by the honorable record of the 
Companions’ consensus (May Allah be pleased with them). They, 
especially the scholars, reciters, and scribes, had heard the Qur'aan 
being recited by the Prophet (PBUH) during all the different phases 
of Islam. 


Zaid once described the tremendous difficulty which this holy, 
honorable task represented : "By Allah, if they had asked me to 
move a whole mountain from its place, it would have been easier than 
the task of compiling the Qur'aan which they ordered me to fulfil !" 


315 


Indeed, to carry a whole mountain, or several mountains, on his 
back would have pleased Zaid more than to make the slightest error 


in moving a verse or completing a chapter. 


His conscience and religion could withstand any error except a 
mistake such as this, no matter how tiny or unintentional it may be. 
However, Allah's guidance accompanied him as well as His promise: 
< Indeed ! We are the One Who has revealed the Qur’aan, and We 
will most surely preserve it > (15 : 9). 


So he succeeded in accomplishing his work, his duty, and 
responsibility as well as it could be. 


* * * 


This was the first phase of the compilation of the Qur'aan. 
However, at that time it had been compiled and written down in 
more than one book. Although the little difference between these 
books was merely in the pronunciation, experience had proven the 
necessity of uniting them all in one book. 


During the caliphate of ‘Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased with 
him) the Muslims continued their expansions, spreading far from 
Al-Madiinah. 


During those days, Islam received each day groups of new 
converts embracing Islam, one group following the other swearing the 
oath of allegiance. It was becoming more and more obvious what a 
danger the variety in the Holy Books might present, especially when 
different tongues recited the Qur'aan. Even the dialects of the earlier 
and later Companions differed. 


At that stage, a group of Companions with Hudhaifah Ibn Al- 
Yamaan went to the Caliph “Uthmaan explaining the necessity to 
unite the Holy Books into one. 


316 


The Caliph asked Allah for His guidance and consulted his 
Companions. As Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq had sought Zaid's aid, so did 
*“Uthmaan. 


So, Zaid brought all his companions and assistants together 
and they brought all the different verses of the Qur'aan from the 
house of Hafsah the daughter of ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with 
them), where they were kept safe. Thereupon Zaid and his comrades 
started to carry on their great task. 


All those who helped Zaid were scribes of the revelation and 
Qur'aan reciters. Despite that, when they disagreed — which rarely 
happened — they always considered Zaid's word to be the final 
decision. 


We can only imagine the tremendous difficulties encountered by 
those destined by Allah to gather and preserve the Qur'aan when we 
read it so easily or hear it recited. 


It is exactly like the horrors they encountered and the souls they 
willingly gave away while fighting in the cause of Allah, in order to 
spread a virtuous, precious religion over the earth and to dispel 
darkness with a clear light. 


(32) 
KHAALID IBN SA‘IID 
A Fighter of the Foremost Muslims 


Khaalid Ibn Sa*iid was born into a highly wealthy and power- 
oriented family. His family lived in luxury and abundance, and his 
father was proud of his influential high status among the Quraish. 
Khaalid descended from Ibn Umaiyah, Ibn ~Abd Shams and Ibn “Abd 
Manaaf. 


When the first rays of Islam crept in, slowly but surely, over 
Makkah to announce in whispers that revelation had descended upon 
Muhammad the Trustworthy in the Cave of Hiraa' with a message 
from Allah to proclaim to His slaves, Khaalid's heart was revived 
and he gave an ear to the whispering which was like a wonderful 
light, and he was also heedful to it. He was thrilled with joy as if he 
had been waiting for this news all his life. He kept on following these 
rays of light wherever they went. Whenever he heard his people 
talking about the new religion, he would join them and listen carefully 
with repressed joy. Every now and then, he would participate in the 
conversation with a word or two that gave impetus to the new 
religion to achieve publicity, effect, and guidance. 


If you had seen him in those days, you would have the 
impression that he was a quiet young man who kept discrete silence. 
Yet beyond this calm appearance lurked a commotion of human 
feeling that was full of movement and joy. You could almost hear 
sounds of drums, trumpets, prayers, and glorifications. You could 
almost see the hoisted flags. His inner-self was feasting in the full 
meaning of the world. You could feel the joy, thrill, and even the 
clamor and clatter of the feast day. 


This young man kept this big feast to himself and concealed it 
from all people. He knew that if his father found out that he 
harbored all this love, enthusiasm, and support for Muhammad's 
invitation to Allah's way, he would offer him as a sacrifice to the 
gods of ~Abd Manaaf. But when our inmerselves are full and 


318 


saturated with a certain feeling, it is not long before we lose control 
over it and it overflows freely and excessively. One day. . . No, it 
was not yet daybreak, and Khaalid was in a state of alert sleepiness 
when he saw a vision that was highly impressionistic, effective, and 
telling. 


To be more precise, one night, Khaalid Ibn Sa‘iid saw in his 
sleep a vision of himself standing on the brink of a great fire. His 
father stood right behind him. Strangely enough, his father was 
incessantly pushing him towards the brink. He wanted to throw him 
tight into the burning fire. Then Khaalid saw Allah's Prophet rush to 
him and pull him with his blessed right hand away from the burning 
fire. 


When Khaalid woke up he knew what he had to do. He 
hastened to Abu Bakr's house and told him about his vision which 
was undoubtedly as clear as broad daylight. Abu Bakr said, "Allah 
chose you for His Mercy. This is the Prophet (PBUH). Follow him 
closely, for Islam will keep you away from hell.” 


Khaalid rushed looking for the Prophet until he found him. 
Then he asked the Prophet about his message. He (PBUH) answered 
him saying, "Worship Allah alone and join none with Him in 
worship. Believe in Muhammad, His slave and Prophet; and, finally, 
abandon the worship of idols which do not hear, see, or have power 
to either harm or benefit you." 


The Prophet expressed his heartiest welcome as he shook 
Khaalid's hand. Khaalid instantly said, "I bear witness that there is 
no god but Allah and I bear witness that Muhammad is His 
Messenger.” Simultaneously, the repressed joyful songs within him 
were set free. In fact, his celebration burst forth, and his father found 
out about his Islam. 


* * * 


Now, on the day of Khaalid's Islam, only four or five people 
had already preceded him in embracing Islam. Sa‘iid thought that his 


son's early Islam would expose him to the humiliation and ridicule of 
the Quraish people. The Islam of one of Sa*iid Ibn Al--Aas's sons, 
had sufficed to shake the ground under Sa‘iid'’s feet and throw 
doubts upon the credibility of his leadership. 


Hence, he summoned Khaalid and asked him, "Is it true that 
you have followed Muhammad, despite his blasphemy against our 
gods?” Khaalid courageously answered, "By Allah, he speaks the 
truth. I do believe in him and I will follow and obey him." 


No sooner had he finished these words than his father leaped 
on him and beat him ruthlessly. Then he threw him into a pitch dark 
room in his house, where he was imprisoned. He tortured him with 
thirst, hunger, and exhausation. Yet Khaalid kept on crying out from 
behind his bars, "By Allah, he speaks the truth and I do believe in 
him." 


Saiid realized that this torture was not enough; therefore, he 
dragged him to the sun-baked ground and dug a ditch for him 
between its heavy burning rocks and kept him there for three days 
without shade or cover. He had absolutely nothing to drink during 
those three days. His father gave up all hope that his son would turn 
back from his faith, so he dragged him back home and kept on luring 
him to apostatize from the new religion, then threatened him. 


This maneuver of promising and threatening went on for a 
while, yet Khaalid was solid as a rock as he said to his father, "I 
will not turn apostate even if you promise me the world. I will live 
and die as a Muslim, so help me Allah." Sa*iid lost his temper and 
shouted fiercely, "Get out of my sight, you fool! By Al-Laat, I will 
not sustain you from now on.” Khaalid answered, "Allah is the best 
of those who make provision." 


Thus, he left the luxurious house that was full of food, clothes, 
and comfort. He left it to experience need and deprivation. But why 
should he worry when he had his faith by his side? Was he not in 
full control over his conscience and destiny? Then why should he be 
bothered by hunger, deprivation, or even torture? If a man found all 


320 


he was looking for in the great truth that Muhammad was inviting 
people to believe in, there should be nothing in the whole world that 
could prove to be more important to him than his inner self, which he 
would then sell to Allah in a bargain in which Allah was both the 
owner and purchaser! 


Thus, Khaalid Ibn Sa*iid subdued torture with sacrifice and 
overcame deprivation with faith. When the Prophet (PBUH) ordered 
his believing Companions to embark on the second emigration to 
Abyssinia, Khaalid Ibn Sa*iid was one of the muhaajiiruun. 


Khaalid settled there for the time destined by Allah. Then he 
returned to his house with his brethren in A.H. 7. When they arrived, 
the Muslims had just finished the conquest of Khaibar. Khaalid 
settled in Al-Madiinah amidst the new Muslim society whose nucleus 
he was a part of, being one of the five first Muslims who had 
witnessed its birth and established its foundations. 


Khaalid did not miss a war or a battle. He was always the first 
to go forth during war time. 


As one of the foremost Muslims, and highly conscientious and 
disciplined, Khaalid was always loved and honored. 


He respected his conviction. Hence, he refused to hide or 
bargain with it. For instance, before the Prophet (PBUH) died, he 
assigned Khaalid to the post of Governor of Yemen. When he heard 
the news concerning Abu Bakr's nomination as caliph and the 
consensus of allegiance given to him, he left his work and set out for 
Al-Madiinah. He knew that Abu Bakr was an unmatched, righteous, 
and pious believer. However, he thought that the caliphate was Bani 
Haashim's right. He believed that Al--Abbaas or “Aliy Ibn Abi 
Taalib should have been the caliph. He clung to his belief and did not 
take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. Notwithstanding that, Abu 
Bakr held no grudge against him. On the contrary, he kept his love 
and appreciation for him. He did not compel him to give the oath nor 
hate him for refusing. He was hardly mentioned among the Muslims 
without the great caliph justly praising him. In time, Khaalid Ibn 


321 


Sa‘iid changed his viewpoint, and one day he broke through the lines 
of the Muslims in the mosque while Abu Bakr was standing on the 
pulpit and gave the oath of allegiance to him. It was a true and 
confident pledge to Abu Bakr. 


% * * 


Abu Bakr marched with his armies to Syria and assigned the 
command of a regiment to Khaalid Ibn Sa*iid. Thus, he became one 
of the commanders of the armies. But before the troops left Al- 
Madiinah, ‘Umar objected to Khaalid Ibn Sa‘iid's command and 
prevailed on the caliph until he changed his previous order. Khaalid 
heard what had happened, yet his only response was, "By Allah, I 
was not overjoyed with being a commander, nor was J broken-hearted 
for being dismissed." 


As-Siddiiq (May Allah be pleased with him) hastened to 
Khaalid's house to offer him his sincere apology and to explain his 
new decision. Then he asked Khaalid which of the commanders of 
the army he would like to accompany to Syria. He asked him if he 
would like to be with his cousin, ~Amr Ibn Al-- Aas or with Shurahbiil 
Ibn Hasanah? 


Khaalid's answered was highly revealing of his greatness and 
inner piety, for he answered, "My cousin is closer to me due to the 
relation of blood and Shurahbiil is closer to me due to his excellent 
piety.” Then he chose to be a soldier in Shurahbiil Ibn Hasanah’'s 


regiment. 


Abu Bakr summoned Shurahbiil before the outbreak of the war 
and told him, "Take care of Khaalid Ibn Sa‘iid. Treat him as you 
would like to be treated if you were in his position. You well know 
his high rank in Islam. You know that when the Prophet died, he was 
already his governor in Yemen. I myself assigned him as a 
commander, then I rescinded my decision. I hope that this revoked 
order will make him even more pious and righteous, for I think that 
command is a trial. 1 gave him the chance to choose his commander 
and he preferred you to his cousin. If you need the opinion of a pious 


and true adviser, you must resort to Abu ‘Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarraah 
first; second, Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal; and third, Khaalid Ibn Sa*‘iid. You 
will definitely find good advice with them. I warn you against acting 
upon your viewpoint alone and without consulting them first." 


The pioneer of those martyred and rewarded in the Battle of 
Marj As-Sufar, where the Muslims and Romans met in terrible and 
deadly combat, was a glorious martyr who took a course in his life, 
from his early youth to the moment of his martyrdom, characterized 
by true belief and courageous action. 


When the Muslims were examining their wounded and martyred 
on the battlefield, he lay there as he always was, a quiet young man 
with a dicrete silence and strong determination. They all cried out, 
"May Allah be pleased with Khaalid Ibn Sa*iid.” 


(33) 
ABU AIYUUB AL-ANSAARIY 
March Forth, Whether You Are Light or Heavy 


The Prophet (PBUH) entered Al-Madiinah and put an end to 
his successful Hijrah. He began his first blessed days in the place of 
his immigration which destiny had selected for unprecedented and 
unmatched feats. 


Riding on his camel, the Messenger(PBUH) advanced among the 
massive crowd which overflowed with enthusiasm, love, and longing. 
People crowded around the camel's halter in competition with one 
another to offer Allah's Messenger their hospitality and 
accommodation. As soon as the procession reached the 
neighborhood of Bani Saalim Ibn “Awf, the crowd stood in the way of 
the procession and addressed the Prophet saying, "O Messenger of 
Allah, please do accept our hospitable accommodation, for we are 
influential people who are great in number and wealth. We can also 
guarantee your support and protection." The Prophet (PBUH) mildly 
urged them to loosen its halter and get out of its way, for it had beer | 
ordered by Allah to stop at a certain place. 


The procession advanced to the neighborhoods of Bani 
Bayaadah, then Bani Saa‘idah, then Bani Al-Haarith Ibn Al-Khazraj, 
then to the Bani *Adiy, Ibn An-Najaar. The people of every tribe tried 
to stop the camel and pleaded with the Prophet (PBUH) to honor 
them with his approval of their hospitable accommodation. Yet the 
Prophet (PBUH) gave them the same answer, smiling thankfully, "Get 
out of its way, for it has been ordered by Allah to go to a certain 
place." Thus, the Prophet (PBUH) left the choice of his abode to 
destiny. 


Later, this abode would be of critical and glorious importance, 
for on this land the mosque out of which the words and light of 
Allah would emanate, illuminating the entire universe, would be 
built. 


324 


Next to this mosque, a dwelling or rather dwellings made of 
clay and bricks would be built with nothing inside them but that 
which is barely sufficient for sustenance and living. These dwellings 
would be inhabited by an inspired instructor and Prophet (PBUH) 
who dawned upon this world to revive its waning spirit and to 
bestow honor and peacefulness upon all those who have said that 
their Lord is only Allah and thereafter stood firm and straight in the 
Islamic faith by abstaining from all kinds of sins and evil deeds 
which Allah has forbidden and by performing all kinds of good deeds 
which He has ordained. They were those who believed in the 
Oneness of Allah, worshiped none but Him alone and did not 
confuse their belief with wrong. They were those who purified their 
religion to Allah and reformed the land and did not make mischief on 
the earth. Indeed, the Prophet (PBUH) was very careful to leave the 
choice of the place of his abode to Allah's determined decree. 


Hence, he loosened the reins of his camel and did not pull it. 
Then he set his heart to Allah and supplicated, “Allah, pick and 
choose for me a place for my abode." 


The camel knelt down in front of the house of Bani Maalik Ibn 
An-Najaar. Then it got up on its feet, circled around the place, then 
went back to the same spot again and knelt down, lowered its neck, 
and was motionless. The Prophet (PBUH) was optimistic and glad 
as he dismounted. One of the Muslims advanced towards the camel, 
took the saddle bags and carried them into his house. His face shone 
with joy and satisfaction as the Prophet (PBUH) who was enveloped 
with good fortune and blessings followed him right into his house. 


Would you like to know who was the happy, lucky man in front 
of whose house the camel knelt down, and the man in whose house 
the Prophet was guest, and the man whom all the people of the city 
envied for his great fortune? He was our hero, Abu Aiyuub Al- 
Ansaariy, also known as Khaalid Ibn Zaid, the grandson of Maalik 
Ibn An-Najaar. 


It was not the first meeting between the Prophet (PBUH) and 
Abu Aiyuub Al-Ansaariy. They had met before when the Madiinah 


325 


delegation journeyed to Makkah to take the oath of allegiance to the 
Prophet (PBUH) in the famous Second Pledge of Al--Aqabah. Abu 
Aiyuub Al-Angaary was among the 70 believers who shook hands 
with the Prophet (PBUH) and gave him his support and loyalty. It 
seems that Abu Aiyuub's great fortune was that his house was chosen 
for the great Muhaajir and the generous Prophet (PBUH) to live in 
when the Messenger of Allah entered Al-Madiinah and established it 
as the capital of Allah's new religion. 


The Prophet (PBUH) preferred to live on the first floor. 
However, no sooner had Abu Aiyuub Al-Angaary ascended to his 
room on the upper floor then he shook with regret for yielding to the 
Prophet's wish and accepting to live and sleep above the Prophet 
(PBUH). Instantly, he pleaded with the Prophet to move to the 
upper floor. He prevailed upon him, and the Prophet moved to the 
upper floor. The Prophet (PBUH) stayed there until the mosque was 
built and his dwelling was built next to it. 


Ever since the Quraish began to fight against Islam, to raid Al- 
Madiinah, the land of Hijrah, and to instigate tribes and organize 
armies to put out Allah's light, Abu Aiyuub became a professional in 
warfare and jihaad. This hero was there in Badr, Uhud, Al-Khandaq 
and the rest of the battles and wars. He sold himself, his money, 
and property to Allah, the Lord of All the Worlds. 


Even after the Prophet had died, Abu Aiyuub never lagged 
behind or turned his back on a battle that the Muslims were destined 
to fight in, notwithstanding the hardships and the atrocities. The 
slogan that he sang day and night, secretly and openly was Allah's 
verse < March forth, whether you are light or heavy> (9 :41). 


He never missed an expedition, but once. He refused to fight in 
an army whose commander was a young Muslim assigned by the 
caliph. Abu Aiyuub was against this choice. This one and only 
mistake shook his inner-most self, and he was always full of regrets 
as he repeated, “It is none of my concern who was appointed by 
“Aliy." Ever since that slip, he never missed a battle, no matter what. 


326 


f 


It sufficed him to live as a soldier in the Muslim army, fight under its 
standard, and defend its sanctity. 


When conflict erupted between “Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah, he 
sided with “Aliy without the slightest hesitation. He believed that 
“Aliy was the rightful Imam who had been chosen by the Muslims. 
When “Aliy died and Mu‘aawiyah took over the caliphate, the 
ascetic, steadfast, and pious Abu Aiyuub held himself aloof. He 
craved nothing of this world but for a place in the battlefield among 
the mujaahiduun who strive in the way of Allah. Therefore, no sooner 
had he seen the Muslim army march forth towards Constantinople 
than he mounted his horse, raised his sword, and galloped towards a 
great and long awaited marytrdom. 


In this particular battle, he was wounded. The commander of 
the army paid him a visit to check up on him. He breathed heavily as 
if his longing to meet Allah made him impatient with the few minutes 
left of his life. The commander, Yaziid Ibn Mu*‘aawiyah, asked him, 
"What is your last wish, Abu Aiyuub?" 


I wonder if any of us can guess or imagine what Abu 
Aiyuub's last wish was? No, his last wish before he died was 
inconceivable and beyond the imagination of most human beings. 


He asked Yaziid to carry his body to the furthest point inside 
the enemy lands and bury him there, then to break through the enemy 
line until he reached his grave so that Abu Aiyuub might hear the 
sound of the galloping Muslim horses clattering over it and realize 
that they had achieved victory. Do you think this is poetic verse? 
No, this is neither poetic verse nor a whim of imagination. No, it 
really happened. It is a fact that the whole world witnessed one day, 
and stood there watching, unbelievingly, with its eyes wide open, and 
listening unbelievingly, with its own ears. Yaziid carried out Abu 
Aiyuub's will to the fullest extent. 


Finally, the body of this very great man was buried in the heart 
of Constantinople — Istanbul nowadays. Even before Islam 
enveloped this part of the world with its light, the Romans of 


327 


Constantinople looked up to Abu Aiyuub as a saint. Strangely 
enough, all the historians who registered the events that sustain the 
previous claim say, “The Romans looked after his grave, visited it, 
and asked Allah to send down rain for his sake during times of 
drought." 


Notwithstanding the quick and regular tempo of the battles that 
Abu Aiyuub's life was full of, leaving him no time to sheathe his 
sword and take his breath, his life was tranquil and pure as the early 
morning breeze. 


He heard the Prophet (PBUH) relate a hadith and he always 
cherished it. The Prophet said, "First, if you perform a prayer, 
perform it neatly as if it was your last prayer. Second, do not utter a 
word for which you will have to apologize later on. Third, rid 
yourself of the hope of having whatever is enjoyed by other people." 


Thus, he never spread slander or mischief, he never desired 
anything, and he spent his life absorbed in spiritual longing as a 
sincere worshiper and with the aloofness of someone on his death 
bed. When it was time for him to die, he desired nothing of this 
world but for this single wish that represented his heroism and 
greatness: "Carry my body far inside the Roman lands, then bury me 
there." He believed in victory. He had enough insight to forsee that 
those distant parts of the world would soon be one of the oases of 
Islam and would be illumined by its light. 


Hence, he wanted to be interred there at the capital of the 
country where the final decisive battle would take place and where he 
could, from his blessed grave, follow up the proceedings of the war: 
the sweeping Muslim armies, the fluttering flags, the neighing of the 
horses, their galloping, and the clash of swords. Today, he is lying 
over there, although he cannot hear the clash of swords and the 
neighing of horses any more, for the decree of Allah has been fulfilled 
upon him. Instead, he hears the magnificent sound of the Aadhaan 
five times a day emanating from the high minarets across the horizon: 


Allahu akbar. Allah is the Greatest. 
Allahu akbar. Allah is the Greatest. 


His overjoyed spirit in its eternal and glorious home answers 
saying, "This is what Allah and His Messenger had promised us and 
Allah and His Messenger spoke the truth." 


329 


(34) 
AL --ABBAAS IBN “ABD AI-MUTTALIB 
The Provider of Water of the Two Harams : The Masjid 
Al-Haram in Makkah and the Masjid An-Nabawi in Al-Madiinah 


In the Year of Drought, the Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar, 
along with a great number of Muslims, went out into a vast open area 
to perform the prayer for rain and supplicate Allah the Most Merciful 
to send down rain. “Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) held Al- 
“Abbaas's right hand in his right hand and raised it towards the sky 
and supplicated, "O Almighty Allah, we used to ask You for rain for 
the Prophet's sake while he was alive. O Almighty Allah, today, we 
ask you for rain for the sake of the Prophet's uncle. So please send 
down rain on us." The Muslim congregation did not leave until rain 
poured announcing glad tidings, irrigation, and fertility. 


The Companions rushed to embrace Al--Abbaas and express 
their affection for his blessed status saying, "Rejoice! You are now the 
provider of water of the two Harams." 


What was the man who was called the provider of water of the 
two Harams really like ? Who was this man for whose sake ‘Umar 
beseeched Allah to send down rain, notwithstanding ‘Umar's piety, 
precedence, and high station well-known to Allah, His Prophet and 
the believers? He was Al--Abbaas, the Prophet's (PBUH) uncle. 
The Prophet (PBUH) held him in great esteem. His reverence and 
love for him were inseparable. He always praised his good nature 
saying, "He is the only one left of my family." 


* * * 


Al-Abbaas Ibn ‘Abd Al-Muttalib was the most generous man 
of the Quraish. Moreover, he was good to his relatives and 
maintained the bond of kinship. 


Al *Abbaas, just like Hamzah (May Allah be pleased with them 
both), was nearly the same age as the Prophet, being only two or 
three years older. Thus, Muhammad and his uncle Al- “Abbaas were 
of the same age and generation as children and as young men. Being 
relatives was not the only bond that made them close friends. They 
were tied by the bonds of age and life- time friendship. 


In addition, Al--Abbaas's good nature and excellent manners 
complemented the Prophet's standards of judgment, for Al--Abbaas 
was excessively generous, as if he was the sponsor of good and noble 
deeds towards humanity. He treasured kinship bonds and cherished 
his family and relatives. He put himself, his influence, and his money 
at their disposal. 


Moreover, he was an extremely intelligent man. His intelligence 
was tinged with craftiness. This, along with his high station among 
the Quraish, enabled him to avert mischief and abuse against the 
Prophet (PBUH) when he began to invite people openly to embrace 
Islam. 


As we have mentioned before, Hamzah treated the Quraish's 
oppression and injustice and Abu Jahl's arrogance and hostility with 
his devastating sword. As for Al--Abbaas, he treated them with a 
kind of intelligence and craftiness that benefited Islam in the same 
way that swords did to protect and defend its existence and victory. 


A group of historians mentioned Al--Abbaas among those who 
were last in embracing Islam, for his Islam was not announced openly 
until the year of the Conquest of Makkah. However, others narrated 
that he was foremost in submitting himself to Islam but that he hid 
his faith. 


Abu Raafi*a, the Prophet's (PBUH) servant, said, "I was Al- 
*“Abbaas Ibn ~Abd Al-Muttalib’s slave when Islam dawned on the 


331 


family of the house. Thus, Al--Abbaas, Umm Al-Fadl and I 
submitted ourselves to Islam, but Al--Abaas hid his Islam." This is 
Abu Raafi*a's statement in which he witnessed Al--Abbaas's Islam 
before the Battle of Badr. 


Consequently, Al--Abbaas was a foremost Muslim. His staying 
in Makkah despite the Prophet's (PBUH) Hijrah was a premeditated 
plan which bore fruit. The Quraish neither hid their suspicions of Al- 
“Abbaas's real intentions, nor could they find a reason to show 
hostility to him, especially when he showed nothing but adherence to 
their way of life and religion. 


When the Battle of Badr took place, the Quraish found their 
golden opportunity to unveil Al--Abbaas's real allegiance. A\I- 
~Abbaas was a shrewd man who detected, at once, the evil plots 
which the Quraish resorted to to alleviate their anguish and loss. 


If Al--Abbaas was able to inform the Prophet (PBUH) in Al- 
Madiinah of the Quraish's plans and preparation, they would still 
succeed in leading him into a battle which he did not believe in and 
did not want. However, it would be a temporary success which 
would soon turn into a devastating upheaval. 


* * * 


The two armies met in combat in the Battle of Badr. The 
Prophet (PBUH) called his Companions saying, “There are men of 
Bani Haashim and of other clans of the tribe who were forced to 
march forth. They do not really want to fight us. Therefore, if any of 
you meet one of them during the battle, I order you to spare his life. 
Do not kill Abu Al-Bakhtariy Ibn Hishaam Ibn Al-Haarith Ibn Assad. 
Do not kill Al--Abbaas Ibn ~Abd Al-Muttalib, for he was forced to go 
forth in this battle." 


Now, the Prophet (PBUH) was not favoring his uncle Al- 
‘Abbaas with a privilege, for it was neither the occasion nor the time 


332 


for privileges. Muhammad (PBUH) would not intercede on his 
uncle's behalf — while the battle reached the apex of atrocity and 
while he saw his companions struck down in the battle of truth — if 
he knew that his uncle was one of the disbelievers. Indeed, if the 
Prophet had been ordered not to even ask for Allah's forgiveness for 
his uncle Abi Taalib, despite his endless support, help, and sacrifice 
for Islam, then how could he order the Muslims who were killing their 
own disbelieving fathers and brothers in the Battle of Badr to make 
an exception for his uncle and spare his life? It certainly does not 
seem logical or feasible. The only logical explanation is that the 
Prophet knew his uncle's secret and hidden allegiance and his secret 
services for Islam. He also knew that he was forced to go forth to the 
battle. Therefore, it was his duty to save him as far as he was able 
to. 


If Abu Al-Bakhtariy Ibn Al-Haarith won the Prophet's 
intercession although he did not hide his Islam nor support it as 
AlAbbaas did, it was because he refused to take part in the 
Quraish's abuse and oppression against the Muslims. Second, he 
went forth to battle out of embarrassment and compulsion. Was not 
a Muslim who hid his Islam and supported it openly and secretly in 
many notable situations more worthy of this intercession? Indeed, 
Al-Abbaas was that Muslim and that helper. Let us go back in time 
to prove this statement. 


* * + 


When 73 men and two women from a delegation of the Ansaar 
came to Makkah during the Hajj season to take the oath of allegiance 
to the Prophet in the Second Pledge of Al-Agqabah and to make 
preparations with the Prophet for the imminent emigration of the 
Muslims to Al-Madiinah, the Prophet (PBUH) informed his uncle Al- 
*Abbaas concerning all that went on between him and the delegation 
and about the pledge, for he trusted his uncle and treasured his 
opinion. 


333 


When it was time for the secret meeting, the Prophet (PBUH) 
and his uncle Al--Abbaas went to where the Ansaar were waiting for 
them. Al--Abbaas wanted to test their loyalty and ability to help 
and protect the Prophet. 


Now, let us hear one of the delegation, Ka*b Ibn Maalik (May 
Allah be pleased with him) narrate the proceedings of this meeting: 
We sat in the ravine waiting for the Prophet (PBUH) until he arrived 
accompanied by his uncle. Al--Abbaas Ibn ‘Abd Al- Muttalib said, 
"O people of Khazraj, you are well aware of Muhammad's lineage. 
We have prevented our people from abusing him. He lives here 
protected and supported by his people and in his own country, yet 
he prefers to accompany you and emigrate to Al-Madiinah. So, on 
the one hand, if you are certain that you will be capable of giving him 
sufficient help, protection, and safety, then fulfil your pledge to the 
fullest. On the other hand, if you intend to forsake and thwart him 
after he has emigrated to you, then you had better show him your true 
colors now before it is too late." 


As Al-Abbaas uttered these decisive words, his eyes were 
surveying the Angaar's faces in order to trace and observe their 
reflexes and reaction to his words. Al--Abbaas was not satisfied 
with what he saw, for his great intelligence was a practical one that 
investigated tangible and solid facts and confronted them from all 
their angles with the scrutiny of a calculating expert. 


Hence, he posed an intelligent question: "Describe to me your 
combat readiness and war strategy." Al--Abbaas was astute 
enough and experienced with the nature and disposition of the 
Quraish to realize that war between Islam and disbelief was 
inevitable, for on the one hand there was no way that the Quraish 
would accept to forsake their religion, glory, and arrogance. On the 
other hand, Islam would not yield its legitimate rights to the power 
of falsehood. The question was, Would the people of Al- Madiinah 
stand firmly behind the Prophet (PBUH) at the outbreak of war? 


Were they, technically speaking, on the same level of expertise in the 
tactics of war, attack, and retreat as the Quraish were ? That was 
what Al--Abbaas had in mind when he asked them to describe their 
combat readiness and war strategy. 


The Ansaar were firm as a mass of mountain as they listened to 
Al- “Abbaas. No sooner had he finished asking this provocative 
question than the Angaar spoke: "By Allah, we are given to warfare. 
We are men of soldierly bearing. We were raised on the tactics of 
war and trained to fight. We inherited excellent warfare expertise 
from our fathers and grandfathers. We have learned to keep on 
shooting arrows until the last one. We have learned to stab with our 
spears until they break. We have learned to carry our swords and 
strike hard until either we or our enemy is vanquished." 


Al-Abbaas was overjoyed as he said, " I can tell from what I 
have just heard that you are masters of warfare, but do you have 
armor?" They answered, "Of course, we have armor, shields, and 
helmets." 


Afterwards, a great and magnificent dialogue occurred between 
the Prophet (PBUH) and the Ansaar, which we will narrate in detail 
later on. That was Al--Abbaas's attitude at The Second Pledge of 
Al--Aqabah. Whether he had already embraced Islam or had not yet 
taken his final decision does not change the fact that his great 
attitude determined his forthcoming role in contributing to the 
eclipse of the power of darkness and the imminent dawn of Islam. 
Moreover, it sheds light on his outstanding stout-heartedness. 


* * * 


Finally, the Battle of Hunain took place, offering more evidence 
of the self-sacrifice of this quiet and compassionate man whose 
impressive and immortal heroism would be projected on the 
battlefield only under pressing necessity. Otherwise, this innate 


heroism would dwell in his innermost self, yet it would always be 
lurking there. 


In A.H. 8 and after Allah had enabled His Prophet and Islam to 
achieve the Conquest of Makkah, some of the influential tribes in the 
Arab Peninsula were enraged by the quick victory that this new 
religion had achieved in such a short time. Therefore, the Hawaazan, 
Thaqiif, Nasr, Jusham, and other tribes held a meeting and agreed to 
wage a decisive war against the Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslims. 


Now, we should not let the word "tribes" mislead us into 
underestimating the gravity of the wars that the Prophet (PBUH) 
fought throughout his life. We must not think that they were small- 
scale skirmishes in the mountains. On the contrary, these tribal wars, 
fought at the tribes’ strongholds, were far more difficult and 
atrocious than ordinary wars. If we bear this fact in mind we would 
not only have an accurate evaluation of the incredible effort exerted 
by the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions, but also a correct and 
trustworthy one of the value of this great victory achieved by Islam 
and the believers, and an illuminated insight into Allah's guidance 
that was conspicuous in their success and victory. 


* * * 


As we have said, the tribes gathered in endless waves of fierce 
warriors. There were 12,000 warriors in the Muslim army. Twelve 
thousand? Who were these warriors ? They were those who, not a 
long time before, had liberated Makkah, dragging the power of 
polytheism and idolatry to the last and bottomless abyss, and had 
raised their flags across the horizon without rivalry or competition. 


This was undoubtedly an unprecedented victory that made 
pride stealthily creep into the victorious Muslims. In the final 


336 


analysis, the Muslims were only human beings. Their large numbers 
and great achievement in Makkah made them vulnerable to pride. 
Consequently they said, "We shall not be overcome by a small group.” 


Their depending solely on their military power, solely and pride 
in their military conquest were unrighteous sentiments that they 
would quickly recover from through a painful yet curing shock which 
was awaiting them, for heaven was preparing them for a much more 
glorious and elevated end than war. The curing shock was a sudden 
large-scale defeat shortly after the two armies met in fierce combat. 
The Muslims at once supplicated Allah in humiliation and 
submission. They perceived that there was no fleeing from Allah, no 
refuge but with Him, and there was no power but His. These 
supplications flowed throughout the battlefield, turning defeat into 
victory. 


Accordingly, the glorious Qur'aan descended addressing the 
Muslims: <... on the Day of Hunain when you rejoiced at your great 
number but it availed you naught and the earth, vast as it is, was 
straitened for you, then you turned back in flight. Then Allah did 
send down His tranquility upon the Messenger and on the believers, 
and sent down forces which you saw not, and punished the 
disbelievers. Such is the recompense of disbelievers > (9 : 25 - 26). 


* * * 


On that day, Al--Abbaas's voice and firmness were the most 
outstanding manifestation of this calmness and tranquility and of 
self-sacrifice. For while the Muslims joined forces in one of the 
valleys waiting for the arrival of their enemies, the polytheists were 
already hidden throughout the ravines with unsheathed swords. 
They wanted to take the initiative. Suddenly, they flung themselves 
into the battlefield and attacked the Muslims ruthlessly. This 
blitzkrieg shook the Muslims and made them turn their backs to the 
battle and run away without even casting a glance at one another. 
When the Prophet (PBUH) saw the chaos that this sudden attack 


337 


brought to the Muslim lines, he at once mounted his white mule and 
cried out at the top of his voice, "Where are my people? Come back 
and fight! Iam truly the Prophet! I am the son of “Abd Al- Muttalib!" 


At that moment, the Prophet (PBUH) stood there surrounded 
by Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, “Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib, Al--Abbaas Ibn “Abd AI- 
Muttalib, his son Al-Fadl Ibn Al--Abbaas, Ja*far Ibn Al- Haarith, 
Rabii*-ah Ibn Al-Haarith, Usaamah Ibn Zaid, Aiman Ibn “Ubaid and a 
few other Companions. 


There was also a woman who was raised to a high station 
among those men and heroes, namely, Umm Suliim Bint Milhaan. 
When she saw the chaos and confusion that the Muslims had fallen 
into, she mounted her husband Abi Talhah's camel (May Allah be 
pleased with them both) and hastened towards the Prophet (PBUH). 
When her baby moved in her womb, she took off her outer garment 
and pulled it tight around her belly. As soon as she reached the 
Prophet (PBUH), she gave him her dagger. The Prophet (PBUH) 
smiled and asked, "Why do you give the dagger to me, Umm Suliim?" 
She answered, "You are dearer to me than my own father and mother. 
Kill those who turned their backs on you as you do your enemies, for 
they deserve the same punishment.” The Prophet's face lit up, for he 
had strong faith in Allah's promise, and he said, "Allah sufficed us 
against them and has been good to us." 


% * * 


In those difficult moments, Al--Abbaas was next to the Prophet 
(PBUH). In fact, he followed him like his shadow, holding the halter 
tightly and defying danger and death. The Prophet (PBUH) ordered 
him to cry out at the top of his voice, for he was a stout and loud- 
voiced man, saying, "Come back and fight, O Ansaar people! Come 
back, for you took the oath of allegiance to Allah and His Prophet." 
His voice sounded throughout the battlefield as if it was both the 
caller and warner of destiny. As soon as those terrified and 
dispersed Muslims heard his voice, they answered in one breath, 


338 


"Here I am at your service. Here I am at your service." They flung 
themselves into the battlefield like a hurricane. They dismounted 
the horses and camels which would not move and ran with their 
shields, swords, and bows as if they were pulled by Al-Abbaas's 
voice. Once again, the two armies met in fierce combat. The Prophet 
(PBUH) cried out, "Now it is time for fierce fighting." It was really a 
ferocious fight. The bodies of Hawaazan and Thaqiif rolled down 
the battlefield. Allah's warriors defeated the warriors who 
worshiped the idol of Al-Laat. Allah had sent down His calmness 
and tranquility on the Prophet and the believers. 


* * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) loved his uncle Al--Abbaas dearly, to the 
extent that he could not sleep when the Battle of Badr lay down its 
burden and his uncle was captured. The Prophet (PBUH) did not 
try to hide his feelings. When he was asked about the reason for his 
sleeplessness, despite his sweeping victory, he said, "I heard Al- 
“Abbaas moan in his fetters." As soon as a group of Muslims heard 
the Prophet's words, they rushed to where the captives were, untied 
Al-Abbaas, and returned to the Prophet and said, "O Prophet, we 
loosened Al--Abbaas's fetters a little." But why should Al--Abbaas 
alone enjoy this privilege? Consequently, the Prophet ordered them, 
"Go and do that to all the prisoners." 


Indeed, the Prophet's love for Al--Abbaas did not mean that he 
should receive special treatment that distinguished him from other 
captives. When it was decided that a ransom would be taken in 
exchange for the captives’ freedom, the Prophet (PBUH) asked his 
uncle, "O “Abbaas, pay the ransom for yourself and your nephew 
“Aqiil Ibn Abi Taalib, Nawfal Ibn Al-Haarith and your ally, “Utbah 
Ibn “Amr and the brothers of Bani Al-Haarith Ibn Fahr, for you can 
afford it." Al--Abbaas wanted to be set free without paying a 
ransom, saying, "O Mesenger of Allah, I was a Muslim but my people 
forced me to go forth in this battle." But the Prophet (PBUH) insisted 
on it. The glorious Qur'aan descended to comment on this incident 


339 


saying, < O Prophet! Say to the captives that are in your hands: If 
Allah knows any good in your hearts, He will give something better 
than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you, and 
Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful > (8:70). 


Hence Al--Abbaas paid the ransom for himself and his friends 
and returned to Makkah. From that point onwards the Quraish lost 
their influence over him and their benefit from his insight and 
guidance. Therefore, Al--Abbaas took his money and luggage and 
joined the Prophet in Khaibar so as to have a place in the ranks of 
Islam and the believers. The Muslims loved, revered, and honored 
him, especially when they realized how much the Prophet (PBUH) 
loved and honored him when he said, "Al- Abbaas was like a twin 
brother to my father. Consequently, if anyone annoyed Al--Abbaas, 
it would be as though he personally annoyed me." 


Al-Abbaas had blessed offspring. “Abd ~Allah Ibn ‘Abbaas, 
the learned of the Muslim nation, was one of those blessed sons. 


+ * * 


On Friday, the 14th of Rajab, A.H. 32, the people of Al- 
*Awaalii in Al-Madiinah heard a crier callling out, "May Allah have 
mercy on whoever saw Al-Abbaas Ibn *Abd Al-Muttalib.” They 
realized at once that Al--Abbaas had died. 


An unprecedented large congregation of people, such as Al- 
Madiinah had not experienced before, accompanied the funeral 
procession to the graveyard. The Commander of the Faithful 
“Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased with him) performed the funeral 
prayer. The body of Abu Al-Fad] was laid in Al-Baqii'. He sleeps 
comforted and delighted among the faithful who have been true to 
their covenant with Allah. 


340 


(35) 
ABU HURAIRAH 
The Memory of the Revelation Era 


It is true that a person's intelligence reckons against him, and 
those who own extraordinary gifts often pay the price at a time when 
they should receive a reward or thanks. The noble Companion Abu 
Hurairah is one of those. He had an unusual gift which was his 
strong memory. 


He (May Allah be pleased with him) was good in the art of 
listening and his memory was good in the art of storing. He used to 
listen, understand, and memorize; then he hardly forgot one word, no 
matter how long his life lasted. That is why his gift made him 
memorize and narrate the Prophetic traditions (Hadiths) more than 
any of the Companions of the Messenger (PBUH). 


During the period of Al-Wada‘iin, the writers who were 
specialized in telling lies about the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) 
misused Abu Hurairah's wide reputation for narrating about the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH), and whenever they fabricated a hadith 
they used to say, "Abu Hurairah said...." By so doing they were 
attempting to make Abu Hurairah's reputation and status as a 
narrator about the Prophet (PBUH) questionable. However, because 
of the extraordinary efforts exerted by great reverent people who 
devoted their lives to serve the Prophetic Hadith and reject every 
falsehood, Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) was 
saved from the lies and fabrications that the vicious wanted to 
infiltrate into Islam through him and to make him bear their sins. 


* + * 


Now, when we hear a preacher, lecturer or the one who delivers 
the Friday sermon saying this transmitted expression, "Narrated by 
Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him): The Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) said,. . ." 


I say when you hear this name in that form, or when you meet it 
many times in books of hadith, biography, jurisprudence, and 
religious books generally, you have to know that you are meeting the 
most interesting personality of the Companions with regard to his 
ability and talents of listening because of the wonderful traditions 
and wise instructions that he memorized about the Prophet (PBUH), 
which was his great fortune and incomparable gift. 


Having this gift (May Allah be pleased with him), he was 
naturally one of the Companions who were most capable of vividly 
reminding you of those days when the Messenger (PBUH) and his 
Companions were living and of transporting you to that horizon 
which witnessed the glorious deeds of the Prophet (PBUH) and his 
Companions who gave vitality and significance to life and led to the 


right path. 


So if these lines have moved your curiosity to get introduced to 
Abu Hurairah and hear some things about him, here is what you 
want. 


He was one of those who reflected the Islamic revolution and all 
the tremendous changes that it brought about. He changed from a 
workman to a master, from a lost man in the crowd to an Imam and 
outstanding man, from a worshiper of accumulated stones to a 
believer in Allah, the One, the Irresistable. 


He said: I was brought up as an orphan, and I emigrated as a 
poor man. I worked for Busrah Bint Ghazwaan for my daily food. | 
used to serve them when they dismounted, and walked near them 
when they rode. And now Allah has married her to me. All praise to 
Allah Who made the religion our support and made Abu Hurairah an 
Imam. 


It was A.H. 7 when he went to the Prophet (PBUH), while the 
latter was in Khaibar, and embraced Islam. From the time he pledge 
allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH), he would not part from him 


342 


except to sleep. Thus were the four years in which he lived with the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) from the time he embraced Islam till the 
Prophet died. We say that those four years were very long, full of 
virtuous words, deeds, and listening. 


* + * 


By virtue of his good nature, Abu Hurairah was able to play a 
prominent role by which he could serve the religion of Allah. There 
were many war heroes among the Companions. There were many 
jurisprudents, propagators of the faith, and teachers, but the milieu 
and people lacked writing and scribes. In that time, mankind — not 
only Arabs — was not much concerned with writing. It was not a 
sign of development in any society. It was the same even in Europe 
not so long ago. Most of its kings, with Charlemagne at the top of the 
list, could not read or write, although they were intelligent and 
capable at the same time. 


* * * 


Let us go back to our talk about Abu Hurairah. He realized by 
his nature the need of the new society that Islam was building for 
those who would keep its legacy and teachings. There were scribes 
among the Companions who used to write, but they were few. 
Besides, some of them had no free time to be able to write every 
hadith that the Messenger uttered. 


Abu Hurairah was not a scribe, but learned by heart, and he 
had this necessary free time, for he had no land to plant or commerce 
to take care of. Believing that he had embraced Islam late, he 
intended to compensate for what he had missed by accompanying 
and sitting with the Messenger (PBUH). Besides, he himself knew the 
gift Allah had bestowed on him, which was his broad, retentive 
memory, which became even broader and stronger after the Messenger 
(PBUH) had invoked Allah to bless it for him. Then why should he 


343 


not be one of those who took the burden of keeping this legacy and 
transmitting it to the coming generations ? Yes, this was the role that 
his talents made possible for him to play, and he had to play it 
without flagging. 


Abu Hurairah was not one of the scribes, but, as we said, he 
had a strong memory that made him retain things in his mind very 
quickly. He had neither land to plant nor commerce to keep him 
busy; hence he used to not part from the presence of the Messenger, 
neither in travel nor at other times. 


Thus, he devoted himself and his precise memory to memorizing 
the hadiths and instructions of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH). 
When the Prophet (PBUH) died, Abu Hurairah kept narrating his 
traditions, which made some Companions wonder how he could 
know all those hadiths? When did he hear them? 


Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) shed light on 
this phenomenon, as if defending himself against the doubts of some 
of the Companions. 


He said: You say that Abu Hurairah narrates much about the 
Prophet (PBUH) and that the Muhaajiruun who preceded him to 
Islam do not narrate those traditions. But my friends among the 
Muhaajiruun were busy with their contracts in the market, and my 
friends among the Ansaar were busy with their lands. I was a poor 
man, always sitting with the Messenger of Allah, so I was present 
when they were absent, and I memorized if they forgot. Besides, one 
day the Prophet (PBUH) said, "Whoever spreads his garment till I 
finish my speech, then collects it to his chest, will never forget 
whatever I've said!" Therefore, | spread my clothes and he directed 
his speech to me, then I collected it. By Allah, I did not forget what 
he said to me later on. By Allah, | would have narrated nothing at 


344 


all, but for a verse of Allah's Book: < Surely those who conceal the 
manifest Revelations and the guidance which We have revealed, 
after We have made it clear for the people in the Book, those it is 
who shall be cursed by GOD and by those who curse > 

(2:159). 


This was the way Abu Hurairah explained the reason for being 
unique in narrating so many hadiths about the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH). First, he had the time to accompany the Prophet more than 
any one else. Second, he had a strong memory blessed by the 
Messenger so it became stronger. Third, he did not narrate because 
he was fond of narrating but because spreading those traditions was 
the responsibility of his religion and life; otherwise he would be a 
concealer of the good and right, negligent of his duties, and would 
deserve the punishment of the negligent. 


For these reasons he kept narrating, and nothing could stop or 
hinder him, even when ‘Umar, the Commander of the Faithful, told 
him, "Stop narrating about the Messenger of Allah, or I'll send you to 
the land of the Daws" — the land of his people. But this prohibition 
from the Commander of the Faithful was not an accusation of Abu 
Hurairah, but a support of a theory “Umar was adopting and 
stressing, that the Muslims during this very period should read and 
memorize nothing but the Qur'aan so that it would settle in their 
hearts and minds. The Qur'aan is Islam's book, constitution and 
dictionary. Narrating about the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) 
abundantly, especially in those years that followed his death (PBUH) 
when the Qur'aan was being compiled, caused unnecessary confusion. 
That is why “Umar used to say, "Get busy with the Qur'aan; it is 
Allah's words. He also used to say, "Narrate a little about the 
Messenger of Allah but for what can be followed." 


When he sent Abu Muusaa Al-Ash‘ariy to Iraq, he said to him, 
"You are going to people where you can hear the sound of the 


345 


Qur'aan in their mosques as if it were a drone of bees. Let them do 
what they are doing and don't occupy them with traditions. I'm your 
partner in this." The Qur'aan had been compiled in a warranted way 
such that nothing had crept into it. But ‘Umar could not guarantee 
that some traditions were not slanted, forged, or taken as a way to 
tell lies about the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and thus harm Islam. 


Abu Hurairah appreciated “Umar's point of view, but he was 
also sure of himself and his honesty. He did not want to conceal 
anything of the traditions or knowledge that he thought would be a 
sin to conceal. Hence, whenever he found a chance to unload the 
traditions he had heard or understood from his breast, he did so. 


* * * 


An important reason which played a prominent role in 
provoking troubles around Abu Hurairah for talking about and 
narrating many traditions was the fact that there was another 
narrator in those days who used to narrate and exaggerate about the 
Messenger (PBUH), and the Muslim Companions were not certain of 
his traditions. This narrator was Ka*b Al-Ahbaar, who was a Jew 
who had embraced Islam. 


Once Marwaan Ibn Al-Hakam wanted to examine Abu 
Hurairah's ability to memorize. He invited him to sit with him and 
asked him to narrate about the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) while a 
scribe sat behind a screen and was told to write whatever Abu 
Hurairah said. After a year, Marwaan invited him once again and 
asked him to narrate the same traditions the scribe had written. Abu 
Hurairah had not forgotten a single word! 


He used to say about himself, "No one among the Companions 
of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) narrates about him more than I do 


346 


except “Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Al--Aas. He used to write, but I 
didn't.” 


Imam Ash- Shaaf‘iy (May Allah be pleased with him) said 
about him, "No one in his period was more capable of narrating 
traditions with such amemory than Abu Hurairah." 


Al Bukhaariy (May Allah be pleased with him) said, "Almost 
eight hundred or more Companions, followers (the generation after 
the Companions) and people of knowledge narrated through Abu 
Hurairah." Thus, Abu Hurairah was a big, immortal school. 


Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him) was an ever- 
and oft-returning worshiper who used to take turns with his wife and 
daughter in praying the whole night. He prayed one third of the 
night, his wife another third, and his daughter a third. Thus, not one 
hour of the night passed in Abu Hurairah's house without prayers. In 
order to be free to accompany the Messenger of Allah (PBUH), he 
suffered the cruelty of hunger like nobody else. He used to talk about 
the times when hunger was so cruel that he would put a stone on his 
stomach, press his liver with his hand, and fall in the mosque while 
twisting that stone such that some of his friends thought that he was 
epileptic, but he was not. 


When he embraced Islam, he had only one continuously 
oppressing problem that would not let him sleep. That problem was 
his mother, for from that day onwards she refused to embrace Islam. 
Not only that, but she also used to hurt her son by speaking ill of the 
Messenger of Allah. One day she spoke to Abu Hurairah about the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) in a way that he hated. So, he left her 
crying and sad and went to the Messenger 's mosque. 


Let us listen to him narrate the rest of the story: I went to the 
Messenger of Allah crying and said, "O Messenger of Allah, I used to 
call Umm Hurairah to Islam, and she used to refuse. Today, I called 
her, but she spoke to me about you in away that I hated. Invoke 


347 


Allah to guide Umm Hurairah to Islam." So the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH) said, "O Allah, guide Umm Hurairah."” Then I ran out to 
give her the good news about the Messenger of Allah's invocation to 
Allah. When | arrived at the door, I found it closed, and I heard the 
sound of water. She called, "Stay where you are, Abu Hurairah." 
Then she put on her shift and veil and she came out saying, "I bear 
witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is His 
slave and Messenger." So I hurried to the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) 
crying out for joy as I had cried for sadness and I said, “Here is good 
news, O Messenger of Allah. Allah has answered your invocation. 
Allah has guided Umm Hurairah to Islam.” | added, "O Messenger 
of Allah, invoke Allah to make all the believers love me and my 
mother.” He said, "O Allah, make every believer love this slave of 
Yours and his mother." 


Abu Hurairah led the life of a worshiper and fighter. He did 
not miss a battle or a pious deed. During the caliphate of ‘Umar Ibn 
Al-Khattaab (May Allah be pleased with him), he made him governor 
of Bahrain. ‘Umar, as we know, used to call his rulers sternly to 
account. If he made one of them governor when he had two 
garments, on the day he ceased to govern , he should still own no 
more than those two garments, and it would be better to leave office 
with only one! But if he left office with any display of wealth, he 
would not escape “Umar's reckoning, even if the source of his fortune 
was halaal. It was another world that ‘Umar filled with wonders 
and miracles. 


When Abu Hurairah was made governor of Bahrain, he saved 
some money from halaal sources. However, ‘Umar knew and invited 
him to Al-Madiinah. 


Let Abu Hurairah narrate the quick conversation that took 
place between them: “Umar said to me, "O the enemy of Allah and 
His Book, did you steal the money of Allah?" I said, "Iam not the 


348 


enemy of Allah or His Book. I am the enemy of their enemy. Besides, 
I am not the one who steals the money of Allah!" He said, "Then how 
did you gather 10,0002" I said, "I had a horse that had foaled 
repeatedly." ‘Umar said, "Put it (the money) in the Bait Al-Maal (the 
treasury).” 


Abu Hurairah gave the money to “Umar and raised his hands 
towards the sky saying, “O Allah, forgive the Commander of the 
Faithful." After a while ‘Umar called Abu Hurairah and offered him 
the governorship again. However, he refused and apologized. ~Umar 
asked why. Abu Hurairah said, "So that my honor would not be at 
stake, my money would not be taken, and my back would not be 
beaten." He added, "I'm afraid I would judge without knowledge or 
speak without patience." 


* * * 


One day, his yearning to meet Allah intensified. While his 
visitors were invoking Allah to cure him of his disease, he was 
imploring Allah saying, "O Allah, I love to meet You, so love to meet 
me." In A.H. 59, he died at the age of 78. His calm body was 
buried in a blessed place among the reverent inhabitants of Al-Baqii’. 


Returning from his funeral, the people kept reciting many of the 
traditions that he had taught them about the noble Messenger. One of 
the recent Muslims asked his friends, "Why was our deceased sheikh 
called Abu Hurairah?" His knowing friend answered, "In the pre- 
Islamic time his name was ‘Abd Shams. When he embraced Islam, 
the Messenger called him “Abd Ar-Rahman. He used to be 
sympathetic towards animals. He had a cat that he used to feed, 
carry, clean, and shelter, and it used to accompany him as if it were 
his shadow. Thus, he was called Abu Hurairah, which means father 
of the small cat. May Allah be pleased with him." 


349 


(36) 
AL-BARAA' IBN MAALIK 
Allah and Paradise ! 


He was one of two brothers who lived for the cause of Allah 
and who pledged allegiance to the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and 
kept their pledge in the course of time. 


The first brother was Anas Ibn Maalik, the servant of the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH). His mother, Umm Sulaim, took him to 
the Messenger at the age of ten and said, "O Messenger of Allah, this 
is Anas, your lad. He will serve you; invoke Allah for him." The 
Messenger kissed him between his eyes and invoked a blessing upon 
him that led his long life towards good and blessing. He said, "O 
Allah, let him have plenty of money and sons. Bless him and let him 
enter Paradise." So, he lived for 99 years, and Allah bestowed upon 
him plenty of sons and grandsons and provided him with a spacious 
garden that gave fruits twice a year! 


* * * 


The second of these brothers was Al-Baraa’ Ibn Maalik, who 
led a great brave life. His motto was “Allah and Paradise!" Whoever 
would see him fighting in the cause of Allah would be totally 
amazed, for when Al-Baraa’ was fighting polytheists with his sword, 
he was not one of those who was looking for victory — although 
victory then was the greatest end -- but he was looking for 
martyrdom. His utmost hope was to be a martyr and to die on the 
field of a glorious battle for the sake of the truth and Islam. For this 
reason, he missed neither a battle nor an expedition. 


One day his brothers went to visit him. He read their faces and 
said, "I guess you're afraid I will die in bed. No, by Allah, He will not 
deprive me of martyrdom.” Allah made his thoughts come true, as 


350 


Al-Baraa’ did not die in bed, but was martyred in one of the most 
glorious battles of Islam. 


* * * 


Al-Baraa' 's bravery on the Day of Al-Yamaamah revealed the 
personality of this hero whom *Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab forbade to 
ever be a leader because his boldness, courage, and search for death 
made it a great risk for him to lead other fighters. 


On the Day of Al-Yamaamah, the Islamic armies were 
preparing to fight under the leadership of Khaalid. Al-Baraa' stood 
licking his lips while the seconds were passing away as if they were 
years until the leader gave his order to advance. His sharp eyes were 
moving quickly all over the battlefield as if searching for the most 
suitable place for the hero to be martyred. Yes, nothing preoccupied 
him in the world but this aim. With the edge of his striking sword, a 
great harvest of the polytheists who called for darkness and 
falsehood were cut down. Then at the end of the battle, the hand of 
a polytheist gave him a stroke that made his body fall on the ground 
while his soul found its way to the angels among the group of 
martyrs and the blessed. 


* * * 


Khaalid shouted, "Allahu Akbar (Allah is the Greatest)!" So the 
close ranks burst forth to their fate, and so did the lover of death, 
Al-Baraa' Ibn Maalik. He started bringing down the followers of 
Musailamah the Liar with his sword, and they were falling like 
autumn leaves because of his extreme courage. 


Musailamah's army was not weak or small, but was the most 
dangerous army of the apostasy. With its numbers, equipment, and 
the death-defiance of its fighters, the army posed an extremely 
serious challenge. They answered the Muslims’ attack with such an 
excessively aggressive defense that they were about to gain the 


initiative and transform their defense into an attack. Just then, some 
sort of anxiety pervaded the Muslim ranks. Their leaders and orators 
started giving words of encouragement from their horses, and they 
were reminded of Allah's promise. 


Al-Baraa’ had a nice loud voice. His leader Khaalid called him 
saying, "Speak, Baraa'! So, Baraa' shouted with very strong and 
meaningful words, "O people of Al-Madiinah! Today you have no 
Madiinah, but it's Allah and Paradise!" These words demonstrate 
the spirit of their speaker and reveal his characters. Yes, it is Allah 
and Paradise. In this situation, thoughts had to do with nothing but 
this. They should not even have thought of Al-Madiinah, the capital 
of Islam, where they had left their houses, women, and children, 
because if they were defeated on that day, there would not be any 
Madiinah to return to. 


Al-Baraa' 's words spread like .. . like what? Any simile would 
be unfair in comparison with its true effect. Let us say only that Al- 
Baraa' 's words spread, and that is it. 


It was a short time before the battle returned to its former 
advantage. The Muslims were proceeding towards a certain victory 
and the polytheists were falling in a shocking defeat, while Al-Baraa’ 
was walking along with his brothers carrying the standard of 
Muhammad (PBUH) to its great appointment. The polytheists 
withdrew and fled, seeking refuge within a big garden which they 
entered. The Muslims’ enthusiasm abated; it seemed that it was now 
possible to change the battle's outcome by this trick that 
Musailamah's followers and army had resorted to. Just then Al- 
Baraa’ ascended a high hill and cried, "O Muslims, carry me and 
throw me over to them in the garden." 


Did I not tell you? He was not looking for victory but 
martyrdom, and this plan, he thought, would be the best end of his 
life and the best way to die. If he was thrown into the garden, he 
would open its gate to the Muslims, and at the same time his body 


352 


would be torn into pieces by the polytheists' swords. At the same 
time, also, the doors of Paradise would be preparing to receive a new 
glorious groom. 


However, Al-Baraa’ did not wait for his people to carry and 
throw him. He climbed the wall by himself, threw himself inside the 
garden, opened the gate, and the armies of Islam rushed in. But Al- 
Baraa' 's dream did not come true: neither did the polytheists swords 
kill him, nor did he die as he wished. 


Abu Bakr (May Allah be pleased with him) spoke the truth 
when he said, "Strive for death and you will live!" On that day the 
hero received from the polytheists' swords over eighty strikes, over 
eighty wounds that caused Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid to continue 
supervising his nursing and care for an entire month. 


All of this, however, was not what he wished. But it did not 
make Al-Baraa’ hopeless. He waited for another battle. The 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) had prophesied that his supplication to 
Allah would be answered. He only had to keep invoking Allah to 
grant him martyrdom, and he did not have to be ina hurry, for every 
matter there is a decree. 


After Al-Baraa’ was healed of the wounds of Al-Yamaamah ; 
he rushed with the armies of Islam that went to escort the powers of 
darkness to their final resting place. Two evanescent empires existed: 
The Romans (Byzantines) and the Persians occupied with their unjust 
armies the countries of Allah and enslaved His servants. Al-Baraa' 
started fighting with his sword, and in the place of each strike was 
built a great wall in the building of the new world that rapidly grew 
under the standard of Islam like the rising sun. 


353 


In one of the Iraqi wars, the Persians in their fight resorted to 
every means of barbarity. They used hooks fixed on the ends of 
chains heated in fire and threw them from their castles so that they 
would hit any of the Muslims who could not avoid them. Al-Baraa 
and his great brother Anas Ibn Maalik were assigned together with 
some of the Muslims to deal with one of these castles. But one of 
these hooks suddenly fell and caught Anas, and he could not touch 
the chain to save himself as it was flaming hot. 


When AlI-Baraa' saw the scene, he hurried towards his brother 
while the burning chain was taking him up the castle wall. Al-Baraa’ 
grasped the chain with his hands and started bravely dealing with it 
till he broke it. Anas was saved, but when Al-Baraa' and those who 
were with him took a look at his hands, they did not find them in 
their place. All the flesh on them was gone; only their burned bones 
remained. And the hero spent another period of time in a slow 
treatment till he was healed. 


Is it not time for the lover of death to reach his end? Yes, it is. 
Here comes the Battle of Tustur where the Muslims met the Persian 
armies. This was such a feast for Al-Baraa’. 


* * * 


The people of Al-Ahwaaz and of Persia gathered in a large 
army to fight the Muslims. The Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn 
Al Khattaab wrote to Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqaas in Kufa and to Abu 
Muusaa Al-Ash‘ariy in Basra to each send an army to meet Al- 
Ahwaaz. He told Abu Muusaa in his message, "Make Suhail Ibn 
“Adiy their leader and send Al-Baraa’ Ibn Maalik with him." 


Thus, those coming from Kufa met those coming from Basra to 
face Al-Ahwaaz and the Persian armies ina fierce battle. The two 


354 


great brothers Anas Ibn Maalik and Al-Baraa' Ibn Maalik were 
among the believing soldiers. 


The war started with dueling, and Al-Baraa’ alone killed a 
hundred swordsmen of the Persians. Then the armies joined in battle, 
and the killed fell from both sides in large numbers. During the fight 
some of the Companions came near Al-Baraa’ and said, "Remember 
the Messenger's words about you, Baraa’: ‘Perhaps there is a person 
with uncombed, dusty hair that people will not look at, but if he 
swears by Allah, He will fulfill his prayer. Among them is Al-Baraa’ 
Ibn Maalik.' O Baraa’, swear by Allah, entreat Him to defeat them 
and render us victorious." 


Hence, Al-Baraa' raised his arms towards the sky and 
supplicated, "O Allah, render them defeated and us victorious, and 
let me catch Your Prophet today." He took a long look at his brother 
Anas, who was fighting near him, as if saying goodbye. Then the 
fighting intensified and the Muslims fought as nobody in the world 
had done, and they were clearly victorious. 


* * * 


Among the martyrs of the battle was Al-Baraa', with a happy 
smile on his face and his right hand grasping a handful of dust 
soaked with his pure blood. His sword was lying beside him. It was 
strong, without notches, undamaged. 


Finally, the traveler arrived at his home. Together with his 
brother martyrs, he ended the journey of a great noble age. And it 
will be cried out to them, "This is the Paradise which you have 
inherited for what you did." 


355 


(37) 
“‘UTBAH IBN GHAZWAAN 
Tomorrow You'll See the Nature of the Rulers after Me 


Among the foremost Muslims and the first Muhaajiruun to 
Abyssinia and then Al-Madiinah, among the extraordinary fighters 
who proved themselves brave in the cause of Allah was this towering 
bright-faced, and humble-hearted man, “Utbah Ibn Ghazwaan. 


+ * * 


He was among the first seven who embraced Islam and 
extended their right hands to the right hand of the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH). They pledged themselves to him while challenging the 
Quraish with all their fortitude and power for revenge. In the first 
days of the mission, the days of difficulty and terror, ‘Utbah Ibn 
Ghazwaan, together with his brothers, stood bravely, which turned 
out later to be the very provision that nourished the human 
conscience and made it grow in the course of time. 


When the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) ordered his Companions 
to emigrate to Abyssinia, ‘Utbah went with them, but his yearning 
for the Prophet (PBUH) did not allow him to settle there. Soon he 
hurried back to Makkah where he stayed near the Messenger until it 
was time for the Hhijrah to Al-Madiinah. So, ‘Utbah emigrated 
again with the Muslims. 


After the Quraish started their provocations and wars, “Utbah 
was always carrying his lance and bow, using them expertly and 
contributing with his believing brothers to the destruction of the old 
world, including all its idols and lies. He did not, however, put his 
weapons down after the noble Messenger had died, but kept 
fighting. His jihaad against the Persian armies was great. 


* * * 


356 


The Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab sent 
him to conquer Al-Abullah and purify its land of the Persians who 
regarded it as a dangerous zone of action from which to launch out at 
the Muslim troops that would be marching across the land of the 
Persian Empire, trying to save the countries and slaves of Allah. 
While ‘Umar was bidding him and his army farewell, he said, 
"Proceed on your way until you reach the remotest Arab country and 
the nearest foreign country. Go, and may Allah bless you. Invite to 
Allah whoever answers you, and impose jizyah upon whoever 
refuses or else use your sword without mercy. Wear the enemy down, 
and fear Allah your Lord." 


* * * 


“Utbah advanced, heading an army that was not big until they 
reached Al-Abullah, where the Persians were massing one of their 
strongest armies. “Utbah organized his troops and stood at the front 
carrying his lance that never missed its target. He called out his 
soldiers, "Allahu akbar (Allah is the Greatest), and Allah will fulfill 
His Promise,” as if he were reading something invisible. It was no 
more than blessed patrols before Al-Abullah surrendered. Its land 
was purified of the Persian soldiers, its people were liberated from 
the tyranny that had often tormented them, and the Great Allah had 
fulfilled His promise. 


* * * 


In the same place as Al-Abullah, ‘Utbah planned the city of Al 
Basrah, constructed it, and built its great mosque. When he wanted 
to leave the city and return to Al-Madiinah, escaping from the 
responsibilities of rule, the Commander of the Faithful ordered him to 
stay. “Utbah stayed in his place leading people in prayer, instructing 
them in religion, judging between them with justice, and giving them 
the most wonderful example in asceticism, piety, and simplicity. He 
fiercely fought the extravagance and luxury of those who liked 
comforts and desires. 


357 


One day he made a speech addressing them. He said: "By Allah, I 

was the seventh of the first seven with the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH), eating nothing but leaves of trees until the corners of our 
mouths were sore. I was given a garment. I cut it into two halves and 
gave one half to Sa‘d Ibn Maalik and I wore the other half." 


* * * 


“Utbah used to fear the extravagance of the world, and in order 
to protect his religion and the Muslims, he tried to persuade them to 
practice asceticism and moderation. Many people tried to turn him 
from his way, to arouse a sense of ruling in his soul, and draw his 
attention to the right of ruling, especially in those countries that were 
never accustomed to such type of ascetic rulers and whose people 
used to respect high-ranking supercilious appearances. But ~Utbah 
used to answer them saying: "I seek refuge in Allah from being great in 
your world and small in the sight of Allah." When he found people 
bored with his austerity he induced them to be earnest and modest 
saying, "Tomorrow you'll see the rulers after me." 


When it was the Hajj season, he appointed one of his brothers 
as successor and went to make the Hajj. When he finished, he 
traveled to Al-Madiinah and asked the Commander of the Faithful to 
discharge him from the rule. But ‘Umar would not lose the reverent 
ascetic who fled from what the mouths of mankind watered for. He 
used to say to them, "You burden me with your trusts and leave me 
alone? No, by Allah, I'll never discharge you.” And that was what he 
said to ‘Utbah Ibn Ghazwaan. 


As ~Utbah could do nothing but obey, he took his camel and 
rode it back to Al-Basrah. But before he mounted it he turned to the 
Qiblah and raised his imploring hands to heaven and invoked 
Almighty Allah not to return him to Al-Basrah or to government rule 
again. His invocation was answered, for while he was on his way to 
this rule, he died. His spirit was given up to its Creator. It was 
happy with what it had exerted and given, with its asceticism and 


358 


continence, with the favor that Allah had completed upon it, and 
with the reward that Allah had prepared for it. 


(38) 
THAABIT IBN QAIS 
The Speaker for the Messenger of Allah ! 


While Hassaan was the peot of the Messenger of Allah and 
Islam, Thaabit was his speaker. The words coming from his mouth 
were strong, comprehensive, and perfect. 


In the Year of Delegations, some men of the Tamiim tribe 
arrived at Al-Madiinah and said to the Messenger of Allah (PBUH), 
"We have come to brag, so please permit our poet and speaker." The 
Messenger (PBUH) smiled and told them, "I permit your speaker. Let 
him speak." 


Their speaker, “Utaarid Ibn Haajib, stood and boasted of his 
people's glories. 


After he had finished, the Prophet (PBUH) told Thaabit Ibn 
Qais, "Answer him." Thaabit stood up and said, “All praise to Allah 
Who created the heavens and earth, in which He controls everything, 
Whose throne extends over the heavens and the earth. And nothing 
is at all except out of His kindness. It is part of His omnipotence to 
make us models and selected His Messenger out of the best of His 
creation, among whom he is of the noblest descent and of the most 
sincere speech. He sent him down His book and made His creation in 
trust of him. And he was the best choice of Allah. Then he called on 
people to believe in him. The Muhaajiruun of his people and his own 
kinsmen believed in him. They were of the noblest descent and best 
deeds. Then we the Angaar were the first to respond. We are the 
adherents of Allah and the ministers of His Messenger." 


* * * 


Thaabit witnessed the Battle of Uhud with the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) and the battles that followed. He was incredibly 
willing to sacrifice himself. 


360 


In the apostasy wars, he used to be in the vanguard, holding the 
Ansaar standard and striking with a sword that never retreated. 


In the Battle of Al-Yamaamah, which we have already 
mentioned more than once, Thaabit witnessed the sudden assault 
that the army of Musailamah the Liar launched against the Muslims 
at the beginning of the battle. He shouted in his loud warning voice 
saying, “By Allah, we did not use to fight that way with the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH)!” 


Then he went not far away, and returned after annointing 
himself and putting on his shroud. He shouted once more, "O Allah! I 
clear myself of what those people have done (i.e. the army of 
Musailamah) and I apologize to You for what they have done (i.e. the 
Muslims’ slackness in fighting)." 


Then Saalim, the servant of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) 
who was holding the standard of the Muhaajiruun, joined him. Both 
dug a deep hole for themselves and then stood in it. They piled up 
the sand on themselves till it covered their hips. They stood as two 
gigantic mountains, with the lower body of each burried in the sand 
and fixed in the bottom of the hole, while their upper bodies 
received the armies of paganism and infidelity. 


They kept striking with their swords whoever came near them 
from Musailamah's army until they were martyred in their place. 


The sight of them (May Allah be pleased with them) was the 
greatest cry that contributed to bringing the Muslims back to their 
positions so that they could change the army of Musailamah the Liar 
into trodden sand. 


Thaabit Ibn Qais, who excelled as a speaker and warrior, used 
to be self-reproaching and to humble himself to Allah. Among the 
Muslims, he was extremely modest and afraid of Allah. 


361 


When this noble verse was sent down < GOD does not love 
any proud and boastful one > (31: 18), Thaabit shut his house door 
and kept crying. It was a long time before the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH) knew about him. He sent for him and asked. Thaabit said, 
"O Messenger of Allah! I like beautiful clothes and footwear. I am 
afraid to be of the arrogant.” The Prophet (PBUH) laughed with 
content and answered, "You are not one of them. You'll live and die 
with blessings and enter Paradise." 


And when the following words of Allah the Exalted were sent 
down < O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the 
Prophet's voice, and do not speak loudly to him, as you speak to one 
another, lest your deeds are rendered fruitless, while you are 
unaware > (49 :2), Thaabit shut himself indoors and kept crying 
again. When the Messenger missed him, he asked about him and sent 
for him. When Thaabit came, the Prophet (PBUH) asked him the 
reason for his absence. Thaabit answered, "I have a loud voice and | 
used to raise my voice above your voice, Messenger of Allah (PBUH). 
My deeds are rendered fruitless then, and I'm of the people of the 
Fire." The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) answered, "You are not one of 
them. You'll live praiseworthily and be martyred, and Allah will let 
you into Paradise.” 


One incident is left in Thaabit's story about which those whose 
thoughts, feelings, and views are limited to their restricted, tangible, 
materialistic world would not feel comfortable. Inspite of this, the 
incident was real, and is quite easily explained to whoever uses sight 
and insight together. 


After Thaabit had fallen martyr in battle, one of the Muslims 
who had not known Islam until recently passed by him and saw 
Thaabit's precious armor on his corpse. He thought it was his right to 
take it and he did. 


362 


Let the narrator of the incident narrate it himself: While one of 
the Muslims was asleep, Thaabit appeared to him in his dream and 
said to him, "I entrust you with my will, so be careful not to say it's a 
dream and waste it. When I fell martyr yesterday, a Muslim man 
passed by me and took my armor. His house is on the outskirts of 
the town. His horse is tall. He put his pot on the armor and above 
the pot put his saddle. Go to Khaalid and tell him to take it. And 
when you go to Al-Madiinah and meet the successor of the Messenger 
of Allah (PBUH) Abu Bakr, tell him I owe so- and- so. Let him pay 
my loan.” 


When the man got up, he went to Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid and 
related to him his dream. So Khaalid sent someone to bring the 
armor, and he found it exactly as Thaabit had described it. And 
when the Muslims went back to Al-Madiinah, the Muslim narrated 
the dream to the caliph, and he fulfilled Thaabit's will. There is not in 
Islam a dead man's will that was fulfilled in that way after his death 
except that of Thaabit Ibn Qais. 


* * * 


Truly, man is a big mystery. < Think not of those who are killed 
in the Way of Allah as dead. Nay, they are alive, with their Lord, 
and they have provision > (3 ; 169). 


363 


(39) 
USAID IBN HUDAIR 
The Hero of the Day of As-Sagiifah 


He inherited noble characteristics, handed down from father to 
son. His father, Hudair Al-Kataa‘ib, was a leader of Al-Aws and 
one of the great nobles and strong fighters of the Arabs in the pre- 
Islamic era. 


Usaid inherited from his father his status, courage, and 
hospitality. Before becoming a Muslim, he was one of Al-Madiinah's 
leaders, a noble of the Arabs, and one of their excellent spearmen. 


When Islam attracted him and he was guided to the Way of the 
Almighty, Worthy of All Praise, he was best honored when he took 
his place as one of Allah and His Messenger's Angaar and one of the 
foremost believers in the great religion of Islam. 


* * * 


He embraced Islam quickly, decisively, and honorably. The 
Messenger (PBUH) sent Mus‘ab Ibn ~“Umair to Al-Madiinah to teach 
and instruct the Muslim Angaar who had given their allegiance to the 
Prophet (PBUH) in the First Pledge of “Aqabah and to call others to 
Allah's religion. 


On that day Usaid Ibn Hudair and Sa*d Ibn Mu*aadh, who 
were leaders of their people, were discussing this stranger who had 
come from Makkah to denounce their religion and call to a new one 
unknown to them. Sa‘d said to Usaid, "Go directly to this man and 
deter him." 


So Usaid carried his spear and hurried to Mus*ab while he 
was a guest of As‘ad Ibn Zuraarah, one of the leaders of Al- 
Madiinah who was among the early believers in Islam. And there, 
where Mus*ab and As'ad Ibn Zuraarah were sitting, Usaid saw a 


crowd of people listening carefully to the rational words with which 
Musab Ibn “Umair was calling them to Allah. Usaid surprised them 
with his anger and outburst. Mus‘ab said to him, "Won't you sit 
down and listen? If our matter pleases you, accept it, and if you hate 
it, we'll stop calling you to what you hate." 


* * * 


Usaid was an enlightened and intelligent man whom the people 
of Al-Madiinah called "Al Kaamil" (The Perfect), a nickname that his 
father used to bear before him. So, when he found Mus*ab appealing 
to logic and reason, he stuck his spear in the ground and said to him, 
"You're right, tell me what you have." 


Mus‘ab started reciting the Holy Qur'aan to him and explaining 
to him the call of the new religion, the true religion whose standard 
Muhammad (PBUH) was ordered to spread. Those who attended 
this assembly said, "By Allah, we saw Islam in Usaid's face before he 
spoke. We knew it because of his brilliance and easiness." 


+ * * 


No sooner did Mus*ab finish his words than Usaid was 
overwhelmed and he shouted, "How good these words are! What do 
you do if you want to embrace this religion?” Musab said, “Purify 
your body and clothes, and bear true witness, then pray." 


Usaid's character was straight, strong, and clear. He would not 
hesitate a second in face of strong opposition, if he knew his own 
way. 


So Usaid got up quickly to welcome the new religion which was 
penetrating his heart and overwhelming his soul. He washed, 
purified himself, and prostrated to Allah the Lord of the Worlds in 
worship, announcing his embracement of Islam and abandonment of 
paganism. 


Usaid had to go back to Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh to give him the news 
of the task which had been assigned to him to deter and expel 
Mus‘ab Ibn “Umair. He went back to Sad, but as he approached 
Sa‘d said to those around him, "Usaid's face is changed. I swear it." 


Yes. He went with a challenging, angry face and came back with 
a face full of mercy and light. 


* + * 


Usaid decided to use his intelligence. He knew that Sad Ibn 
Mu’aadh was well known for his pure nature and keen 
determination. He knew that Islam was not far from him. He only 
needed to hear what he himself had heard of Allah's word, which the 
Messenger's envoy to them, Musab Ibn ‘Umair, was good at reciting 
and explaining. But if he said to Sa‘d, I've embraced Islam; go and 
embrace it, the outcome would not have been ensured. He had to 
prompt Sa‘d in a way that would push him to Mus‘ab's gathering in 
order to see and listen. How could he do this? 


As we said before, Mus'ab was a guest at As‘ad Ibn Zuraarah's 
house. Asad Ibn Zuraarah was Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh's cousin. So 
Usaid said to Sa‘d, " I was told that the Haarithah tribe went out to 
kill As‘ad Ibn Zuraarah and they know he is your cousin." 


Angry and heated, Sa‘d took his spear and ran fast to where 
Sa‘d, Mus‘ab, and the Muslims with them were sitting. When he 
came near the gathering, he found nothing but quiet overwhelming 
them while Mus*ab Ibn “Umair sat in the middle of them reciting 
Allah's verses humbly, and they carefully listened to him. 


Just then he realized the trick that Usaid had played on him to 
make him go to this gathering and listen to what the envoy of Islam, 
Mus*ab Ibn “Umair was saying. So, Usaid's insight into his friend's 
character proved to be accurate. 


366 


Sa'd had hardly heard the Qur'aan when Allah opened his heart 
to Islam, and soon he took his place among the first believers. 


* * * 


Usaid bore a strong, bright belief in his heart and mind, and his 
belief made him full of patience, discernment, and sound appraisal 
that made him a trustworthy man. 


During the expedition against Bani Al-Mustaliq, “Abd Allah Ibn 
Ubaiy was so furious that he said to the people of Al-Madiinah 
around him, " You've let them enter your town and share your money. 
By Allah, if you cease giving them what you have, they'll turn to 
another place. By Allah, if we return to Al-Madiinah, indeed the 
more honorable will expel the meaner from there." 


The venerable Companion, Zaid Ibn Arqam heard these 
poisoned hypocritical words, so he had to inform the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH). The Messenger (PBUH) was much hurt. When he met 
Usaid he said, "Don't you know what your friend has said?" Usaid 
asked, "Which friend, O Messenger of Allah?" The Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) answered, “Abd Allah Ibn Ubaiy." Usaid said, 
"What did he say?" The Messenger said, "He claimed that if he 
returned to Al-Madiinah, the more honorable will expel the meaner 
from there." Then Usaid said, "By Allah, you, O Messenger of Allah, 
will expel him from there, by Allah's permission. By Allah, he is the 
meaner and you are the more honorable." 


He added, "O Messenger of Allah, treat him gently. By Allah, 
Allah brought you to us_ while the people of “Abd Allah were 
preparing to crown him king of Al-Madiinah. He sees that Islam has 
deprived him of kingship." 


With this calm, profound thinking, Usaid used to solve 
problems using his presence of mind. 


367 


On the Day of As-Saqiifah, just after the death of the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH), a group of the Angaar headed by Sa‘d 
Ibn ‘Ubaadah announced their right to succession and debated 
furiously. Usaid, who was a prominent Ansaar, as we know, took a 
positive attitude in settling the matter and his words were like the 
dispelling of shadows on the course of events. He stood to address 
the group of Ansaar: "You know that the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) 
was one of the Muhaajiruun. His successor, then, should be one of 
the Muhaajiruun. We used to be the Ansaar of the Messenger of 
Allah. Today we have to be the Angaar of his successor." 


And his words brought peace and safety. 


* + * 


Usaid Ibn Hudair (May Allah be pleased with him) spent his 
life as a humble worshipper, sacrificing his energy and money in the 
cause of goodness, and putting the advice of the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH) to the Angaars in his mind: "Be patient until you meet me in 
the realm of Paradise." 


He was the object of honor and love by As-Siddiiq because of 
his religiosity and noble manners. He also had the same status in the 
heart of the Commander of the Faithful “Umar and in the hearts of all 
the Companions. 


Listening to his voice while reciting Qur'aan was one of the 
greatest honors that the Companions aspired to. His voice was so 
humble and resonant that the Messenger (PBUH) said about it that 
the angels came near its possessor one night to hear it. 


In the month of Shaaban A.H. 20, Usaid died. The 
Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar insisted on carrying his bier on his 
shoulders. Under the earth of Al-Baqii', the Companions buried the 
body of a great believer. They went back to Al-Madiinah 
remembering his virtues and repeating the noble Messenger's words 
about him: "What an excellent man Usaid Ibn Hudair is!" 


368 


(40) 
“ABD AR-RAHMAN IBN “AWF 
What Makes You Cry, Abu Muhammad? 


One day while Al-Madiinah was calm, heavy dust was 
accumulating near it till it covered the horizon. The wind pushed 
these quantities of yellow dust coming from the soft sand of the 
desert so that they came near the gates of Al-Madiinah, blowing 
strongly over the streets. 


People thought it was a raging storm, but soon they heard 
beyond the dust the noise of a great caravan. After a while, 700 
heavily laden camels were crowding the streets. People were calling 
each other to see the festive scene and rejoicing at the provisions the 
caravan might be carrying. 


* * * 


The Mother of the Faithful ~Aa'ishah, (May Allah be pleased 
with her) heard about the coming caravan and asked, “What's going 
on in Al-Madiinah?" She was answered, "It's a caravan of “Abd Ar- 
Rahman Ibn “Awf coming from Syria carrying his goods.” 


The Mother of the Faithful said, "But can one caravan make all 
this tremor?” "Yes, Mother of the Faithful. There are 700camels." 


The Mother of the Faithful nodded and looked away as if 
searching for the memory of a scene she had witnessed or a 
conversation she had heard, then she said, " I heard the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) saying, 'I saw “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ~Awf crawling into 
Paradise.” 


369 


“Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn “Awf crawling into Paradise! Why does 
he not jump or hurry into it with the first ones to embrace Islam 
among the Companions of the Messenger? When some of his friends 
informed him of what *Aa'ishah said, he remembered that he heard 
the Prophet (PBUH) say this hadith more than once in various forms. 


Before unloading the camels, he hastened to ~Aa'isha's house 
and told her, "I call you to witness that this caravan with all its loads 
is in the cause of Allah Almighty." And the loads of 700 camels were 
distributed among the people of Al-Madiinah and the places around 
it in a great charity festival. 


This incident alone represents the complete image of the life of 
“Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn *Awf, Companion of the Messenger of Allah. 
He was very much a successful merchant and rich man. He was the 
wise believer who refused that his portion of this life would sweep 
away his portion of religion, or that his fortune would make him lag 
behind the caravan of belief or the reward of Paradise. He (May 
Allah be pleased with him) would generously sacrifice his fortune 
and feel satisfied. 


When and how did this great man embrace Islam? He did so 
very early in the first hours of the mission. He had done so even 
before the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) entered Daar Al-Arqam's 
house and took it as a seat to meet his faithful Companions. He was 
one of the eight who were the first to embrace Islam. When Abu Bakr 
preached Islam to him together with “Uthmaan Ibn *Affaan, Az- 
Zubair Ibn Al--Awaam, Talhah Ibn ‘Ubaid Allah, and Sa*d Ibn Abi 
Waqgaag, they did not grudge or doubt the matter. On the contrary, 
they hastened with As-Siddiiq to the Messenger of Allah, 
acknowledging him as Allah's Messenger and carrying his standard. 


From the time he embraced Islam till he died at 75, he was a 
splendid model of a great believer, which made the Prophet (PBUH) 
count him among the ten to whom he gave glad tidings of inheriting 


370 


Paradise. This also made ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased with him) 
count him among the six advisers whom he assigned for succession 
after himself. He said, "The Messenger of Allah (PBUH) died while 
pleased with them." 


After ~Abd Ar-Rahman embraced Islam, he faced his own 
portion of the persecution and challenges of the Quraish. When the 
Prophet (PBUH) ordered his Companions to emigrate to Abyssinia, 
Ibn “Awf emigrated but returned to Makkah. Then he emigrated to 
Abyssinia in the second migration, and from there to Al-Madiinah, 
where he witnessed Badr, Uhud, and all the battles. 


He was very lucky in his trade to an extent that aroused his 
amazement. He said, "If I lift up a stone, I find silver and gold under 
it." Trade for “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn *Awf (May Allah be pleased with 
him) was not greed or monopoly. It was not even a desire to gather 
money or riches. It was work and duty whose success made him 
enjoy them and urged him to exert more effort. He used to have an 
enthusiastic nature so that he found comfort in any honorable work, 
wherever it was. If he was not praying in the mosque or fighting a 
battle, he was working in his trade that was thriving so much that his 
caravans were arriving at Al-Madiinah from Egypt and Syria, laden 
with everything that the Arabian Peninsula might need in garments 
and food. 


Evidence of his ebullient nature is his course ever since the 
dawn of the Muslims’ Hijrah to Al-Madiinah. In those days the 
Messenger (PBUH) associated every two of his Companions as 
brothers, a Muhaajir (Emigrant) from Makkah with an Ansaar 
(Helper) from Al-Madiinah. This association took place in an 
astounding way. Each Angaar in Al-Madiinah shared with his 
brother Muhaajir everything that he owned, even his bed. If he was 
married to two women, he would divorce one for his brother to 
marry! 


The noble Messenger (PBUH) associated *Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn 
“Awf and Sa‘d Ibn Ar-Rabii‘a as brothers one day. Let us listen to 


371 


the noble Companion Anas Ibn Maalik (May Allah be pleased with 
him) narrating to us what happened: 


Sad said to “Abd Ar-Rahman, "O brother, I'm the richest in Al- 
Madiinah. Take half of my fortune. And I have two wives. Choose 
the one you like better and I'll divorce her for you to marry." So ~Abd 
Ar-Rahman Ibn “Awf_ said, "Allah bless your family and money. 
Show me the way to the market." He went to the market, bought, 
sold, and gained profit. 


That is how he led his life in Al-Madiinah, whether during the 
Messenger's lifetime (PBUH) or after his death, doing his duty 
towards religion or the world's work and succeeding in his trade, so 
much so that, as he said, if he lifted up a stone, he would find gold 
and silver under it! 


What made his trade blessed and successful was his pursuing 
the halaal, and his strictly moving away from the haraam, or even the 
doubtful. What made it even more blessed and successful was that it 
was not for “Abd Ar-Rahman alone. Allah had a bigger share in it, 
by which he used to strengthen the ties of his family and brothers and 
prepare the armies of Islam. If commerce and fortune are usually 
evaluated on the basis of stocks on hand and profits, “Abd Ar- 
Rahman Ibn “Awf's fortune was evaluated on the basis of what was 
expended from it in the cause of Allah, the Lord of All the Worlds. 


One day he heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) saying to 
him, "O Ibn *Awf, you are a rich man, and you are going to crawl into 
Paradise. So lend to Allah in order to set your feet free." Ever since 
he heard this advice from the Messenger of Allah, he started lending 
to Allah a goodly loan. Then Allah increased it manifold to His 
credit in repaying. 


One day, he sold some land for 40,000 dinars and distributed 
it all to the people of Zuhrah tribe, the Mothers of the Faithful, and 
the poor Muslims. Next day, he provided the Islamic armies with 
500 horses, on the third day with 1,500 camels. 


When he was about to die, he bequeathed 5,000 dinars in the 
cause of Allah and 400 dinars for each one who was still living of 
those who had witnessed Badr. Even ~Uthmaan Ibn “Affaan (May 
Allah be pleased with him) took his share of the bequeathal inspite 
of his riches and said, "Abd Ar-Rahman's money is halaal and pure. 
Its food gives health and blessing." 


* * * 


Ibn “Awf was master of his money, not its slave. The proof of 
this was that he did not have trouble gathering it. He used to gather 
halaal money with much ease. Besides, he did not enjoy it alone, but 
together with his family, relatives, brethren, and all his community. 
He was so generous and hospitable that he used to say, "The people 
of Al-Madiinah are partners of Ibn “Awf in his money. He lends to a 
third of them, pays the debts of a third, and strengthens his ties of 
kinship and gives away a third." 


These riches would not have made him comfortable or happy if 
they did not make him capable of adhering to his religion and 
supporting his brethren. Nevertheless, he was always apprehensive 
of these riches. 


One day when he was fasting, he was served iftaar (the meal at 
sunset which breaks the fast). He had hardly seen it when he lost his 
appetite and cried saying, "When Musab Ibn “Umair was martyred — 
and he was better than me — he was wrapped in his garment so that 
if it covered his head, his feet showed, and if it covered his feet, his 
head showed. When Hamzah was martyred —and he was better 
than me — they found nothing to wrap him with except his garment. 
Now the world has been expanded for us, and we have been given 
much. I'm afraid our blessings are hastened." 


One day some of his friends gathered around food in his house. 
Just as it was put in front of them, he wept. They asked him, "What 
makes you weep, O Abu Muhammad?" He answered, "The 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) died when he and his family had not 


373 


even satisfied their appetites with barley bread. | can't see that our 
latter days have shown something better." 


In addition, his large fortune never brought pride on him, so 
much so that they said of him, "If a stranger sees him sitting among 
his servants, he wouldn't be able to distinguish him from the others." 


If only this stranger would know a part of Ibn “Awf's fortitude 
and good deeds — that, for example, he was wounded on the Day of 
Uhud with twenty wounds, one of which left a permanent lameness 
in one leg, and that some of his teeth fell out on the same day, leaving 
a clear defect in his articulation — then the stranger would know that 
this tall man who had a bright face but had lost his front teeth as a 
result of his injury at Uhud was “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn ~“Awf (May 
Allah be pleased with him). 


+ * * 


Mankind's nature makes it a habit that riches court power; that. 
is, the rich always like to have influence that protects their fortune, 
multiplies it, and satisfies the lust of pride and selfishness usually 
caused by riches. If we had seen “Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn *Awf with his 
large riches, however, we would have seen a marvelous man 
conquering human nature in this field and surpassing it pre-eminently. 


This showed itself when ~Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab (May Allahbe 
pleased with him) was dying. He chose six Companions of the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) for them to select from among themselves 
the new successor. The fingers were pointing at Ibn “Awf. Some 
Companions even conversed with him about his right to win 
succession, but he said, "By Allah, it is better for me to put a knife in 
my throat and penetrate it to the other side." 


Thus, the six chosen Companions had hardly held a meeting to 
select one of them to succeed ‘Umar Al-Faaruug ( The One Who 
Distinguishes Truth from Falsehood), when Ibn ~Awf informed his 
five other brothers that he was renouncing the right given to him by 


“Umar when he made him one of the six from whom the successor 
would be selected, and that one of them would be selected from the 
other five. Soon, this ascetic attitude made him the judge of the noble 
five. They agreed that he would select the successor among them. 
Imam “Aliy said," 1 heard the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) describing 
you as honest among the people of heaven and earth." Finally, Ibn 
“Awff selected ‘Uthmaan Ibn ‘Affaan successor, and all the rest 
agreed with him. 


* * * 


This is a real rich man in Islam. Did you see what Islam did to 
him, putting him above riches with all its temptations, and how it 
molded him in the best way? In A.H. 32 his soul ascended to its 
Creator. “Aa'ishah, the Mother of the Faithful, wanted then to 
bestow on him a special honor, proposing as he was dying to bury 
him in her room near the Messenger (PBUH), Abu Bakr, and ‘Umar. 
But as a Muslim he was so refined that he was too modest to put 
himself in this rank. Besides, he had made a previous promise. One 
day, he and ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh‘uun* had promised each other that 
whoever died after the other would be buried near his friend. 


While his soul was preparing for its new journey, his eyes were 
dripping tears and his tongue was stammering, "I'm afraid of being 
held up by my friends because of what I had of abundant money.” 
But soon, Allah's calmness overwhelmed him, and tender happiness 
covered his peaceful face. His ears listened closely, as if there were a 
sweet voice coming near them. Perhaps he was listening then to the 
truth of the Messenger's words (PBUH) to him, "Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn 
“Awf will enter Paradise.". Maybe he was listening also to Allah's 
promise in His book: < Those who spend their wealth in Cause of 
Allah, and do not follow up their gifts with reminders of their 
generosity or with injury, their reward is with their Lord. On them 
shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve > (2: 262). 


* The biography of ‘Uthmaan Ibn Madh‘uun is written in the 
earlier part of this book. 


375 


(41) 
ABU JAABIR ‘ABD ALLAH IBN “AMR IBN HIRAAM 
Shaded by Angels! 


When the seventy Angaar gave their allegiance to the Messenger 
of Allah (PBUH) in the Second Pledge of ~Aqabah, “Abd Allah Ibn 
~Amr Ibn Hiraam, also known as Abu Jaabir Ibn “Abd Allah, was one 
of them. When the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) chose some leaders 
among them, “Abd Allah Ibn ~Amr was one of these leaders. The 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) made him the leader of his people, the 
Bani Salamah. When they returned to Al-Madiinah, he sacrificed 
himself, his money, and his family in the service of Islam. After the 
Messenger's Hijrah to Al-Madiinah, Abu Jaabir found utmost 
enjoyment in accompanying the Prophet (PBUH) day and night. 


* * * 


- In the Battle of Badr, he went out fighting like a hero. At Uhud 
he dreamed of his death before the Muslims went out to battle. He 
was overwhelmed by a true sense that he was not coming back, and 
his heart was full of joy. He called to him his son Jaabir Ibn “Abd 
Allah, the noble Companion, and said, "I see myself killed in this 
battle. Maybe I'll be the first martyr among the Muslims. By Allah, 
I'll leave no one that I like more than you after the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH). I am in debt, so pay my debts and make your brothers your 
own concern." 


+ e * 


The next morning the Muslims went out to encounter the 
Quraish that had come in an uproarious army to invade their 
peaceful city. A dreadful battle raged, at the beginning of which 
the Muslims achieved rapid victory. It could have been a decisive 
victory but for the archers, whom the Messenger (PBUH) had ordered 
to stay at their positions and never to leave them, who were tempted 
by this quick victory over the Quraish. They left their positions on the 


376 


mountain and were pre-occupied with gathering the booty of the 
defeated army. The Quraish quickly gathered its scattered remnants 
when it found the Muslims’ back completely exposed. They surprised 
them by a quick attack from behind, changing the Muslim victory into 
defeat. 


* * * 


During this bitter fight, “Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr died as a martyr. 
When the Muslims went to find their martyrs after the fighting had 
ended, Jaabir Ibn “Abd Allah went to search for his father. He found 
him among the martyrs, whom the polytheists had made a dreadful 
display of along with other heroes. Jaabir and some of his family 
were crying over the martyr of Islam ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Hiraam 
when the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) passed by. He said, "Cry over 
him or not, the angels are here to shade him with their wings!" 


* * * 


Abu Jaabir's belief was strong. His love, or even eagerness, to 
die in the cause of Allah was his greatest ambition. Afterward, the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) announced the great news that depicted 
his great fondness of martyrdom. One day he (PBUH) said to ‘Abd 
Allah's son Jaabir, "O Jaabir, Allah has never spoken to anyone but 
from behind a veil, but He has spoken to me face to face. He said, 
‘O slave, ask Me to give you.’ He said, 'O Allah, I ask You to return 
me to earth, to be killed again in Your cause.' Allah answered him, "I 
said before: They will not return to them.’ He said, 'O Allah, then 
inform those after me of the blessings you have bestowed on us.’ So 
exalted Allah sent down: <Think not of those who are killed in the 
way of Allah as dead Nay, they are alive, with their Lord, and they 
have provision. They rejoice in what Allah has bestowed upon them 
of His Bounty, rejoicing for the sake of those who have not joined 
them, but are left behind (not yet marytred) that on them no fear 
shall come, nor shall they grieve>" (3 : 169-170). 


* * * 


377 


When the Muslims were identifying their pious martyrs after the 
Battle of Uhud and the family of “Abd Allah Ibn “Amr had 
identified his corpse, his wife carried him, together with her brother 
who was martyred also, on her camel. She began taking them back to 
al-Madiinah to bury them there. Likewise did some other Muslims 
for their martyrs. But the crier of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) 
caught up with them and announced the Messenger's order: Bury the 
martyrs on their battle-ground. So they all returned with their 
martyrs. 


The Noble Prophet (PBUH) was supervising the burial of his 
martyred Companions who had fulfilled their promise to Allah and 
sacrificed their precious souls as humble offerings to Allah and His 
Messenger. When it was *Abd Allah Ibn Hiraam's turn to be buried, 
the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) called, "Bury “Abd Allah Ibn “Amr 
and “Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh in one grave; they were loving and sincere to 
each other in this world." 


* * * 
Now, during the moments of preparing the happy grave to 


receive the two noble martyrs, let us have a loving look at the second 
martyr, “Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh. 


378 


(42) 
“AMR IBN AIl-JAMUUH 
I Want to Walk Proudly with My Lameness in Paradise ! 


He was related to ‘Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Hiraam by 
marriage, being the husband of his sister Hind bint “Amr. ‘Amr Ibn 
Al- Jamuuh was one of the leaders of Al-Madiinah and one of the 
chiefs of the Salamah tribe. His son Mu‘aadh Ibn “Amr, who was one 
of the seventy Ansaar of the pledge of 'Aqabah preceded him in 
Islam. 


Mu‘aadh Ibn “Amr and his friend Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal * were 
calling the people of Al-Madiinah to Islam with the enthusiasm of 
bold and believing youth. 


It was a custom that the nobles kept symbolic idols in their 
houses other than the big idols set up in places of public gathering. 
As a nobleman and chief, “Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh made an idol to install 
in his house and called it Manaaf. His son Mu‘aadh Ibn ‘Amr agreed 
with his comrade Mu‘aadh Ibn Jabal to make ‘Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh's 
idol an object of ridicule. They used to enter his house at night, take 
the idol and throw it into a cess pit. And when ‘Amr would wake up 
he would not find Manaaf in its place, and would keep looking for it 
till he found it thrown into that pit. He used to rage and say, "Woe 
unto you, who transgressed our gods this night!". Then he would 
wash and perfume it. When night came again, the two Mu‘aadh, 
would do to the idol as they had done the previous night. 


When “Amr got weary he took his sword and put it on 
Manaaf's neck and said to it, "If you are a beneficial god defend 
yourself." When he woke up he did not find it in its place, but rather 
found it discarded in the same cess pit. But this time, it was not in 
the pit alone but was tied to a dead dog by a strong rope. 


* His biography has already been written 


379 


While he was angry, sorry, and surprised, some of the nobles of 
Al-Madiinah who had _ preceded him in Islam approached him. They 
pointed at the idol tied to the dead dog and addresed “Amr Ibn Al- 
Jamuuh's mind, heart and good sense, talking to him about the Most 
True and Most High Allah Whom there is nothing like. They talked 
to him about the trustworthy, faithful Muhammad who came to give, 
not to take, to guide, not to misguide. They talked to him about 
Islam that came to liberate mankind from all the shackles, revive the 
spirit of Allah in them, and spread His light in their hearts. 


In a few moments, “Amr discovered himself and his destiny. 
He purified and perfumed his clothes and body, then went, bearing 
his head high, to acknowledge the Seal of the Prophets (PBUH) and 
to take his place among the believers. 


* * * 


One may wonder how those nobles and leaders of their people, 
like “Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh, could believe in helpless idols to that 
extent. How did their reason not restrain them? How do we 
render them today among the great men after their embracing Islam 
and sacrificing? It is easy to raise these questions nowadays, as no 
child would accept to set up a piece of wood in his house and 
worship it. But in olden days, people's hearts used to embrace such 
doings. Their intelligence and genius could do nothing against 
tradition. 


For example, Athens, in the days of Pericles, Pythagoras, and 
Socrates, attained a dazzling intellectual progress. However, all its 
people, including philosophers and judges, used to believe in 
sculptured idols in a ridiculous way. The reason is that religious 
sense in those remote ages was not as developed as the intellectual 


progress. 


* * * 


“Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh dedicated his heart and life to Allah, the 
Lord of the Worlds. Although he was generous by nature, Islam 


380 


made him more generous so that he put all his money in the service of 
his religion and his brethren. 


The Messenger (PBUH) asked a group of the Bani Salamah 
tribe, the tribe of ‘Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh, "Who is your chief, O Bani 
Salamah ?" They answered, " Al-Jad Ibn Qais, inspite of his being a 
miser." He (PBUH) said, "No, your chief is the white curly haired 
“Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh." This testimony from the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH) was a great honor to Ibn Al-Jamuuh. 


As “Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh dedicated his money in the cause of 
Allah, so he was willing to sacrifice his soul and life as well. But 
how? There was a severe lameness in his leg that made him invalid 
for participating in battle. He had four sons who were all strong 
Muslim men. They used to go out with the Messenger (PBUH) in 
expeditions, persisting in doing their duty of fighting. However, ‘Amr 
tried to go out in the Battle of Badr. His sons implored the Prophet 
(PBUH) to persuade him not to 80 out, or even to order him if he was 
not persuaded. So, the Prophet (PBUH) told him that Islam 
exempted him from jihaad because of his severe lameness, When he 
began pleading, the Prophet (PBUH) ordered him to stay in Al- 
Madiinah. 


* * * 


When the Battle of Uhud came, “Amr went to the Prophet 
(PBUH), imploring him to permit him. He said, "O Messenger of 
Allah, my sons want to prevent me from going out with you to fight. 
By Allah, I want to walk proudly with my lameness in Paradise." As 
he strongly insisted, the Prophet (PBUH) permitted him to go out. 
So, he took his weapon and set out to walk happily, invoking Allah 
in a submissive voice, "O Allah, bestow martyrdom upon me and 
don't return me to my family." 


When the two rival forces met on the Day of Ubud, ~Amr Ibn 
Al-Jamuuh and his four sons set out striking the polytheists with their 
swords. “Amr was walking proudly in the middle of the fierce battle. 


381 


With each step his sword cut off the head of a polytheist. He struck 
with his right hand, then looked around at the highest part of the 
horizon, as if hastening the arrival of the angel who would make him 
die and accompany him to Paradise. 


Yes, he asked his Lord for martyrdom, being sure that Allah, 
Glorified and Exalted be He above all, would respond to him. He 
was very much eager to walk proudly with his lame leg in Paradise so 
that its people would know that Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH), knew how to select his Companions and how to develop 
men. 


That which he had been waiting for happened. A sword blow 
announced the time of the advance of a glorious martyr to the 
Paradise of immortality. 


* * * 


When the Muslims were burying their martyrs, the Messenger 
(PBUH) repeated his order which we have already heard elsewhere: 
"Put “Abd Allah Ibn ~Amr Ibn Hiraam and ~Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh in 
one grave; they were loving and sincere to each other in this world." 


* * * 


The two loving friends, the two martyrs, were buried in one 
grave under the battlefield that received their pure souls and 
witnessed their extraordinary bravery. 


Forty-six years after they and their companions had been 
buried, a violent torrent descended and covered the graveyard, 
because of a fountain head of water that Mu*aawiyah made. The 
Muslims hurried to remove the martyrs’ bodies. It was a surprise, 
however, to find them as those who participated in removing their 
bodies described: “Having soft bodies and flexible limbs." 


382 


As Jaabir Ibn ‘Abd Allah was still alive, he went with his family 
to remove the bodies of his father, “Abd Allah Ibn ‘Amr Ibn Hiraam, 
and his aunt's husband, ‘Amr Ibn Al-Jamuuh. However, he found 
them in their grave as if they were sleeping. They were not changed at 
all: their faces even had the same smile of happiness that they had 
had the day they were summoned to meet Allah. 


Are you surprised ? No, do not be. The great, pious, pure souls 
that have controlled their destinies usually leave in the bodies that 
once were their refuge, a kind of immunity that wards off the 
decomposing factors and the influence of the soil. 


383 


(43) 
HABIIB IBN ZAID 
A Legend of Sacrifice and Love 


In the Second Pledge of a ~Aqabah which has been mentioned 
many times, 70 men and two women of Al-Madiinah gave their 
allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH). Among those blessed men and 
women were Habiib Ibn Zaid and his father Zaid Ibn “Aasim (May 
Allah be pleased with both of them). His mother was Nusaibah bint 
Ka*b, one of the two women who were the first to give allegiance to 
the Prophet (PBUH). The second woman was his maternal aunt. 
Thus, he was a veteran believer in whose backbone and ribs faith ran 
rather than blood. He lived near the Prophet (PBUH) after he 
emigrated to Al-Madiinah. There, he never missed an expedition in 
the cause of Allah or lagged behind. 


* * * 


One day the south of the Arab Peninsula witnessed the 
emergence of two presumptuous and arrogant liars who claimed 
prophethood and tried to drag people into the swamp of sin and 
disbelief. One of these impostors was called Al-Aswad Ibn Ka*b Al 
~Aansiy, from San‘aa’. The other was Musailamah the Liar from Al- 
Yamaamah. Both impostors incited people against the believers in 
their tribes who responded to what Allah ordained and who believed 
in His Prophet. They also goaded them against the Prophet's 
messengers whom he sent to their lands. Moreover, they even went so 
far as to ignite suspicion against prophethood itself and committed 
hideous mischief in the land, causing corruption and disbelief. 


* * * 


One day, the Prophet (PBUH) was surprised when a messenger 
arrived with a message from Musailamah in which he said, "From 
Musailamah Allah's Prophet to Muhammad Allah's Prophet. Peace 
be upon you. We are your partner in prophethood; consequently, we 


384 


have half of the earth and the Quraish has the other half , but the 
Quraish want unjustly to have it all !" 


The Prophet (PBUH) summoned one of his scribes and dictated 
this answer to Musailamah: "In the name of Allah, the Most 
Beneficient, the Most Merciful. From Muhammad _ the Prophet of 
Allah to Musailamah the Liar. Peace be upon those who followed the 
right path. Verily, the earth is Allah's. He gives it as a heritage to 
whom He will of His slaves and the blessed end is for the pious and 
righteous persons who fear Allah." 


The Prophet's words were direct and crytal clear. They 
exposed the liar of the Bani Haniifah who thought that prophethood 
was a kingdom, so he demanded his piece of the cake, namely, half 
the earth and its people. The messenger carried the Prophet's answer 
to Musailamah, yet it only made him more mischievous and corrupt. 


* cd * 


He went on spreading his falsehood and slander and went on 
abusing the believers and instigating people against them. The 
Prophet (PBUH) thought it best to give him one last chance, so he 
sent a message to convince him not to commit any more of his folly. 
He picked Habiib Ibn Zaid as his messenger. Habiib hastened 
enthusiasticly with the glorious mission the Prophet (PBUH) had 
entrusted him with. He hoped that Musailamah’'s heart would be 
guided to the right path and that he would rewarded endlessly in the 
Hereafter. 


* * * 


The traveler reached his destination. Musailamah the Liar 
read the Prophet's message, but he was blinded by its light, which 
only made him more aberrant and arrogant. 


Musailamah was really no more than a flagrant liar. He indeed 
behaved accordingly. He lacked the least manliness, sense of honor 


385 


or decency of the Arabs which might have prevented him from 
shedding the blood of a messenger, which was highly respected and 
even held sacred by all Arabs. 


It was as though this noble religion Islam wanted to give 
humanity a new lesson of greatness and herosim. Only this time, 
both its subject matter and its tutor were one and the same person, 
Habiib Ibn Zaid. 


Musailamah the Liar called upon people to witness one of his 
so-called memorable days. The messenger of the Prophet, Habiib Ibn 
Zaid, was brought in. It was clear from his wounds and bruises that 
he had been abused and tortured severely by those criminals. They 
thought that they could strip him of his valor so that he might appear 
in a state of complete humiliation and defeat before the crowd. They 
hoped that he would then give Musailamah the credibility he craved 
when he called upon him to witness to his fake prophethood before 
the crowd. Thus, the notorious liar would be able to make a fake 
miracle that would cement his prestige among those whom he 
deluded. 


* * * 


Therefore, Musailamah asked Habiib, "Do you bear witness 
that Muhammad is, indeed, the Messenger of Allah?” Habiib anwered 
boldly, "Yes, I do bear witness that Muharnmad is, indeed, the 
Messenger of Allah." Musailamah's face went white with humiliation 
and embarrassment yet he asked, "Do you bear witness that I am the 
Messenger of Allah?” Hahiib scornfully replied, "Nonsense!" 


The impostor Musailamah's humiliated face darkened with 
spiteful madness. His scheme had failed. His torture of Habiib had 
been futile. He was slapped so fiercely before the crowd which he 
himself had gathered to witness his so-called miracle. This slap was 
so strong that it shattered his assumed dignity once and for all. He 


386 


became as violent as a wounded bull as he summoned his 
executioner, who rushed and stabbed Habiib's body with his sword. 
He slew him, cutting his body into small pieces, one by one Habiib 
made no sound beside chanting stoically, "There is no god but Allah 
and Muhammad is His Messenger.” | 


* * * 


It was as though he wanted to celebrate his Islam until the very 
last moment of his life. Now, if Habiib, on that day, had tried to 
escape this horrible death by a pretense of his faith in Musailamah's 
prophethood, his faith would not have been questioned, doubted or 
blemished in any way. But he was a man who had witnessed the 
Second Pledge of Al--Aqabah along with his father, mother, brother, 
and aunt, and ever since those decisive blessed moments he had 
carried upon his shoulders the responsibility that ensued his oath and 
faith to the fullest. He could not for a moment hold his life and 
principles as separable. Therefore, he found a rare opportunity to 
win his life once and for all. His life was an embodiment of his faith. 
It embodied his stead-fastness, greatness, heroism, sacrifice, and 
martyrdom for the sake of Right and Truth, the splenor of which 
surpassed all victories. 


The Prophet received the sad news of Habiib's marytrdom with 
patience, for Allah's inspiration made him see the future fate of 
Musailamah. He could almost see his death with his own eyes. As 
for Nusaibah bint Ka*b, Habiib's mother, she gnashed her teeth for a 
long while on hearing the terrible deed, then she swore a solemn oath 
to avenge her son's death upon Musailamah and to thrut her sword 
and spear right into his wicked body. 


It seemed that fate watched her anguish, patience, and courage 
on receiving this news and showed great admiration and sympathy 


for her calamity and decided all at once to stand by her until she 
fulfilled her oath. 


After a short while, the Battle of Al-Yamaamah took place. 
Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq, the Prophet's caliph, organized an army to 
march to Al Yamama where Musailamah had already organized a 
huge army. 


Nusaibah marched along with the Muslim army and threw 
herself into the battlefield armed with a sword in her right hand and 
a spear in her left one. She kept on shouting, "Where are you 
Musailamah, you enemy of Allah?" 


When Musailamah was killed and his followers were like 
carded wool, the standards of Islam fluttered victoriously and 
proudly. Nusaibah's strong and brave body was strained with spear 
wounds . She stood there recalling the amiable face of her beloved son 
that seemed to linger about the place. Wherever she looked, she saw 
the face of her son Habiib. It was somewhere out there smiling 
contentedly on every victorious fluttering flag. 


388 


(44) 
UBATY IBN KA‘B 
Rejoice with the Knowledge, Abu Al-Mundhir 


The Prophet (PBUH) asked Abu Al-Mundhir one day, "Which 
is the greatest verse in the Holy Qur'aan?" He answered, "Allah and 
His Prophet know best." The Prophet (PBUH) then repeated his 
question, "Which is the greatest verse in the Holy Qur'aan, Abu Al- 
Mundhir?" Ubaiy finally answered < Allah! None has the right to be 
worshiped but He, the Ever-Living, the One Who sustains and 
protects all that exists ...> (2 : 255) 


The Prophet's face brightened with joy as he patted Abu Al- 
Mundhir on the back and said, "I congratulate you for having such 
knowledge and insight, Abu Al-Mundhir.” 


Abu Al-Mundhir whom the Prophet (PBUH) congratulated for 
the insight that Allah had bestowed on him is Ubaiy Ibn Ka*b, the 
great Companion. He was one of the Ansaar, the citizens of Al- 
Madiinah who helped and aided the Muhaajiruun. He belonged to 
Al-Khazraj tribe. He witnessed the Pledge of Al--Aqabah, the Battle 
of Badr, and the rest of the great events. He held a highly 
distiguished position among those who were the first to commit 
themselves to Islam. 


The Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased 
with him) said, "Ubaiy is the master of the Muslims.” 


Ubaiy ibn Ka*b was one of the first Muslim scribes who wrote 
down the revelation that descended on the Prophet (PBUH) as well 
as messages. He was a pioneer in learning the Holy Qur'aan by heart, 
reciting it in a slow, pleasant tone and comprehending its content. 


One day, the Holy Prophet (PBUH) said to Ubaiy Ibn Ka*b, “I 
was ordered to recite the Qur'aan to you." Ubaiy knew that the 
Prophet (PBUH) took his orders from the Spirit, therefore, he was 


389 


overwhelmed with thrill and asked the Prophet (PBUH) anxiously, 
"You are dearer to me than my own mother and father! Please tell me, 
did the Spirit mention me by name?" The Prophet (PBUH) answered, 
"Yes, it resounded your very name and your family name in the 
kingdom of heaven and earth." 


Now, a Muslim who was so close to the Prophet (PBUH) must 
indeed be a special one. Throughout the years in which Ubaiy Ibn 
Ka*b accompanied the Prophet (PBUH) , he tried to stay close to him 
so as to quench his thirst for Islam from the Prophet's inexhaustible 
spring. Ubaiy Ibn Ka‘b adhered tenaciously to his covenant in 
worship, piety, and conduct. Even after the Prophet's death, he was 
always there to warn people against wrong-doing and remind them of 
their pledge, morals, and asceticism when the Prophet was alive. He 
used to address his companions in such impressive words saying, 
"We stood as one man when the Prophet was alive, but as soon as he 
departed we went in different directions." 


* * * 


He was steadfast in his adherence to.piety. He resorted to 
asceticism to escape life's seduction and delusion. He saw that life 
really begins when it ends and that no matter how long a man lives in 
luxury surrounded by graces and blessings, he will end up empty- 
handed but for his good deeds and bad deeds. Ubaiy contemplated 
about life and said, "Man's food is a good example of what life is all 
about, for no matter how much you are careful that it tastes delicious 
and that its ingredients are well proportioned, look what it turns to 
after you digest it." 


Whenever Ubaiy addressed people, he was like a magnet that 
attracted their attention and interest. He feared no one but Allah 
and desired nothing of life. When Islam gained more lands and 
influence and he saw that Muslims flattered their rulers, he warned 


390 


saying, "They are ruined and will ruin others. I don't pity them, but I 
pity the Muslims that they will ruin." 


* + * 


His extreme piety and fear of Allah made him cry whenever 
Allah or the Day of Judgment was mentioned. The noble Qur'aan's 
verses shook his heart and soul whenever he recited them or heard 
them recited. Yet a certain verse made him incredibly sad: < He has 
the power to send torment on you from above or from under your feet, 
or to cover you with confusion in party strife, and make you to taste 
the violence of one another > (6:65). 


The thing that Ubaiy most dreaded was that one day the 
Islamic nation would suffer turmoil and violence at the hands of its 
own sons. He always asked Allah's safety and protection. He won 
it by Allah's mercy and grace and met Allah as a true believer who 
felt completely secure and rewarded. 


(45) 
SA*D IBN MU AADH 
Rejoice, Abu ‘Amr! 


He committed himself to Islam at the age of 31 and won 
marytrdom at 37. This seven years lapse was a tough one in which 
Sa‘d Ibn Mu*aadh (May Allah be pleased with him) exerted all his 
enegry in the service of Allah and His Messenger (PBUH). 


* * * 


Look ! Do you see that handsome, gallant, tall man with a 
radiant face? He is the one. 


He ran quickly to As‘ad Ibn Zuraarah to see this man who came 
from Makkah, Mus*ab Ibn “Umair, whom Muhammad (PBUH) had 
sent to Al-Madiinah to call people to commit themselves to Islam and 
monotheism. He was going there to drive this stranger out of Al- 
Madiinah along with his religion ! But no sooner had he approached 
Mus-ab's assembly at the house of his nephew, As*ad Ibn Zuraarah, 
than his heart was revived by a sweet pacifying breeze. No sooner 
had he reached those men who gathered there, taken his place among 
them and listened intently to Mus*ab's words than Allah guided him 
to the right path that illuminated his heart and soul. In one of the 
incredible miracles of fate, the leader of the Ansaar put aside his 
spear and shook hands with Mus.ab as a sign of his allegiance to the 
Prophet (PBUH). 


A new sun shone on Al-Madiinah as soon as Sa‘d Ibn Mu*aadh 
committed himself to Islam. It would encompass many hearts that 
would revolve in the sphere of Islam later on. Sa‘d committed 
himself to Islam and withstood the hardships that ensued with much 
heroism and greatness. When the Prophet (PBUH) emigrated to Al- 
Madiinah, the houses of Bani Al-Ashhal —Sa*d's tribe — welcomed 


392 


the Muhaajiruun, and their money was utterly at their disposal 
without arrogance, abuse, or limitation. 


+ * * 


When the Battle of Badr was about to take place, the Prophet 
(PBUH) gathered his Companions, both Angaar and Muhaajiruun, to 
consult them on the preparations for war. His amiable face turned 
towards the Ansaar and he addressed them saying, "I want to know 
your opinion about what should be done concerning the imminent 
battle." 


Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh stood up and said "O Prophet of Allah, we 
firmly believe in you, and we witness that what descends on you is 
the truth. We swore a solemn oath and gave you the allegiance, so go 
ahead with whatever you want, and we shall stand by your side. We 
swear by Allah Who has sent you with the truth that if you reach 
the sea and cross it, we will cross it hand in hand with you. No man 
will lag or stay behind. We are absolutely ready to go to war against 
our enemy tomorrow for we are given to terrible warfare and we are 
sincere in our desire to meet Allah. I hope that Allah will make us do 
what will make you proud of us. So go on with whatever is in your 
mind. Allah bless you." 


* * * 


Sa‘d's words made the Prophets’ face brighten with satisfaction 
and happiness as he addressed the Muslims and said, "Rejoice, for 
Allah promised me one of the two parties of the enemy (either the 
army or the caravan). By Allah I can almost see with my own eyes 
where each one of the enemy will be killed.” 


In the Battle of Uhud, the Muslims lost control and dispersed 
as they were taken by surprise by the army of disbelievers. 
Everything was hectic, yet Sa°d Ibn Mu‘aadh stood there as if pinned 


393 


to the ground next to the Prophet (PBUH). He defended him 
courageously as a noble warrior should do. 


* * * 


The Battle of Al-Khandaq came as a suitable opportunity for 
Sa*d to show his admirable manliness and amazing valor. The 
Khandag Battle came as a clear sign for the shrewd and deceitful 
schemes with which Muslims were being ruthlessly haunted by an 
enemy who had no consideration whatsoever for justice or covenant. 
For while the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions were living in Al- 
Madiinah in peace, reminding one another to worship and obey 
Allah, hoping that the Quraish would refrain from their hostility, a 
group of Jewish leaders stealthily headed for Makkah to instigate the 
Quraish against the Prophet (PBUH). The Jews pledged to help the 
Quraish if they decided to raid Al- Madiinah. They made an 
agreement with the disbelievers and even laid down the battle plan. 
Moreover, on their way home they incited Bani Ghatfaan — one of 
the biggest Arab tribes — and made an agreement with its leaders to 
join forces with the Quraish army. 


The war plan was ready and everyone knew his role. The 
Quraish and Ghatfaan were to attack Al-Madiinah with an enormous 
army, whereas the Jews were to sabotage Al-Madiinah 
simultaneously with the attack. 


When the Prophet (PBUH) found out the treacherous scheme, 
he resorted to counterplot. First, he ordered his Companions to dig a 
trench around Al-Madiinah to hold back the attackers. Second, he 
sent Sa*d Ibn Mu‘aadh and Sa*d Ibn “Ubaadah to Ka*b Ibn Asad, the 
leader of Bani Quraidhah, to learn exactly where they stood 
concerning the imminent war. At that time, mutual agreements and 
treaties were already signed between the Prophet (PBUH) and the 
Jews of Bani Quraidhah. The two messengers of the Prophet met 
with the Jewish leader, yet to their surprise he denied the agreement 


by saying, "We did not sign any agreement or treaty with 
Muhammad." 


It was hard for the Prophet to expose the people of Al- 
Madiinah to such a deadly invasion and exhausting siege; therefore, 
the only answer was to neutralize Ghatfaan so that the attacking 
army would lose half of its men and strength. He began to negotiate 
with the Ghatfaan leaders so that they would forsake the Quraish in 
exchange for one third of Al-Madiinah's crops. The leaders of 
Ghatfaan accepted this agreement, and both parties were to sign it 
shortly. 


The Prophet (PBUH) could not go any further without 
consulting his Companions. He valued Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh and Sa*d 
Ibn “Ubaadah's opinion, for they were the leaders of Al- Madiinah 
and had the right to have a say in any decision that affected it. 


The Prophet (PBUH) told them about his negotiations and that 
he had resorted to this compensation lest Al-Madiinah and its 
inhabitants be exposed to this dangerous attack and horrible siege. 
Both Sa*ds asked the Prophet (PBUH), "Is it a matter of choice or is 
it an inspiration from Allah?" The Prophet (PBUH) answered, "It is 
actually a matter that I chose for you. By Allah, I only do this 
because I can clearly see that the Arabs joined forces to strike you as 
one man so I want to curb their strength." Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh had the 
intuition that their fate as men and as believers was being subtly 
tested so he said, "O Messenger of Allah, when we and those Jews 
were disbelievers and polytheists, they did not even dream of eating 
a date from our land unless we gave it to them out of generosity, 
hospitality, or for trade purposes. So how is it, after Allah has 
guided us to Islam and made us honored by it and by you, that we 
give them our money? By Allah, we can do without this agreement, 
and we will give them nothing but warfare until Allah settles our 
dispute." The Prophet (PBUH) at once changed his mind and 


395 


notified Ghatfaan's leaders that his Companions rejected the 
proposed agreement and that he approved and supported their 
opinion. 


* * * 


A few days later Al-Madiinah witnessed a horrible siege. It 
was, in fact, a siege which it brought upon itself rather than was 
forced upon it due to the trench that was dug as a protection and 
safely procedure. The Muslims were prepared for war. Sa‘d Ibn 
Mu*aadh marched around with his sword and spear and recited lines 
of poetry that mean, "I waited anxiously for the battle to start. How 
beautiful death seems when the time is the right time." 


In one of the rounds of war, Sa‘d's arm was showered with the 
arrows of one of the disbelievers, and blood gushed severely from his 
wounds. He received first aid assistance to stop the bleeding, then 
the Prophet (PBUH) ordered him carried to the mosque where a tent 
was‘ put up so that he would be near the Prophet while he was 
nursed. The Muslims carried their great hero into the Prophet's 
mosque and Sa‘d looked up to the sky and said, "O Allah our Lord, 
if the war against the Quraish is to last any longer, please do let me 
live a little while longer to fight against them, for I like nothing better 
than fighting those people who hurt Your Prophet, disbelieved him, 
and even drove him to emigrate. But if the war has already ended, 
please make my wounds pave my way to martyrdom. I implore You, 
dear Allah, not to let me die until I avenge myself upon Bani 


Quraidhah!" 


Allah will stand by you, Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh! For who could say 
such a thing in such a situation but you ? Allah did fulfil his 
suplication. His injury caused his death a month later, but he did not 
die until he had taken his revenge on the Jews of Bani Quraidhah. 
After the Quraish became desperate in their attempt to vanquish Al- 
Madiinah and their soldiers were gripped by panic, they took their 


396 


arms and equipment and returned to Makkah ashamed and 
disappointed. 


The Prophet (PBUH) believed that Al-Madiinah had been 
compromised by the deceit and treachery of the Jews for too long. 
They left the Muslims in the lurch whenever they chose, a thing that 
the Prophet could no longer accept. Therefore, he ordered his 
Companions to march towards Bani Quraidhah, and there the 
Muslims besieged them for 25 days. When the Jews were certain that 
there was no escape from the Muslims, they pleaded with the 
Prophet (PBUH) to let Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh, their ally in pagan times, 
decide what would become of them. 


* * * 


The Prophet (PBUH) sent his Companions to bring Sa‘d from 
his tent at the mosque. He came carried on a camel and he looked so 
pale and sick. The Prophet (PBUH) addressed him, "Sa‘d, decide 
what should be done to Bani Quraidhah." Sa‘d remembered their 
treachery and deceit in general and in the Battle of Al Khandaq in 
particular, when Al-Madiinah had come too close to its ruin, and 
said, “I say kill their warriors, capture their children, and 
distribute their money." Thus Sa‘d did not die until he had taken his 
revenge. 


* + * 


Sa‘d's wounds became worse every day. One day, the Prophet 
(PBUH) visited Sa‘d and found him on the verge of death. so he put 
his head on his blessed lap and called upon Allah, "O Allah, Our 
Lord, Sa‘d has striven hard in the way of Allah. He believed in Your 
Prophet and did his very best. So please do accept his soul with 
goodly acceptance." The words of the Prophet (PBUH) fell like 
coolness and safety on the departing noble soul. He strove to open 
his eyes, hoping that the last face he saw would be the Prophet's and 
said, "Peace be upon you, Prophet. I do witness that you are indeed 
the Messenger of Allah." 


397 


The Prophet (PBUH) took a farewell look of Sa‘d's face and 
said, "Rejoice, Abu “Amr.” Abu Sa*iid Al-Khudriy (May Allah be 
pleased with him) said, "I was one of those who dug Sa‘d's grave, 
and each time we dug out a layer of sand, we smelled musk. This 
went on until we reached his burial niche." Sa‘d's death was a tragic 
loss for the Muslims. Their only consolation was when they heard the 
Prophet (PBUH) say, "The throne of the Most Beneficient shook 
when Sa*d Ibn Mu*aadh died." 


(46) 
SA*D IBN “UBAADAH 
The Carrier of the Ansaar Standard 


Sa‘d Ibn Mu‘aadh is hardly ever mentioned without Sa‘d Ibn 
“Ubaadah. Both were leaders of Al-Madiinah. Sa‘d Ibn Mu*aadh 
was the leader of Al-Aws tribe and Sa‘d Ibn “Ubaadah of Al- 
Khazraj. Again, both were foremost in Islamic faith. They witnessed 
the Pledge of Al--Aqabah and lived next to the Prophet (PBUH) as 
obedient and sincere believers and soldiers. 


Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubaadah held a special position among the Angaar 
as he had his share of the abuse and torture Muslims were subjected 
to at the hands of the Quraish in Makkah! It was only natural that 
the Quraish would torture those who lived in Makkah, but to torture 
a man from Al-Madiinah was rather exceptional. ~Ubaadah was not 
an ordinary man; he was a distinguished ‘and influential leader. This 
was a privilege that was enjoyed only by Sa‘d Ibn “Ubaadah. 


After the Pledge of Al--Aqabah allegiance was concluded in 
secret and the Angaar were getting ready to travel, the Quraish found 
out about the allegiance the Ansaar had given to the Prophet 
(PBUH). Their agreement with the Prophet (PBUH) allowed him to 
emigrate with his Companions to Al-Madiinah to flee the power of 
polytheism and darkness and seek sanctuary and support there. 


At that point, the Quraish lost self-control, so they went on 
hunting those who pledged the Prophet. The disbelievers captured 
Sa‘d Ibn *Ubaadah, tied his hands to his neck with his saddle girths, 
and dragged him back to Makkah, where they beat and tortured him! 


How could this happen to Sa‘d Ibn “Ubaadah? He was the 
leader of Al-Madiinah who always helped anyone of the Quraish 
who needed help, protected their trade, and was hospitable to them 
whenever they visited Al-Madiinah. Those who captured and 
abused him surely did not know who he was. But even if they had 


known, would it have made any difference? They were the ones who 
tortured the elite of Makkah when they committed themselves to 
Islam, were they not? In those days, the Quraish were absolutely 
mad. They watched Ignorance collapse under the pressure of Truth, 
so the only thing that they could do was to avenge themselves 
ruthlessly and heedlessly. 


As we have already said, Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubaadah was surrounded 
by disbelievers who battered and tortured him. Now, let us hear the 
story as told by Sa‘d himself: By Allah, I was in such a terrible state 
in their mercy, when I saw a group of people from the Quraish 
approaching me. Among them there was this white man who looked 
as bright as daylight, so I said to myself, Well if there is someone 
among those people left with the least sense of compassion and 
mercy, then it must be this man. Unfortunately, as he came close to 
me, he raised his fist and punched me severely, so I said to myself 
that none of them is kind-hearted enough to come to my rescue. And 
there I was a prey in their hands as they dragged me when a man 
hurried to me and scolded me saying, "Fie on you! Doesn't anyone of 
the Quraish owe you a favor of good neighborliness?" I answered, 
"Yes, of course, I used to help Jubair Ibn Muta‘m's traders and stand 
by them against those of my people who were unjust to them. I also 
gave aid to Al-Haarith Ibn Harb Ibn Umaiyah." Then the man urged 
me to shout their names and say they owe me the right of good 
neighborliness so I did. Then the man rushed to them and told them, 
"A man from Al-Khazraj is being beaten in the valley and he is calling 
out your names and saying that you owe him the right of good 
neighborliness." They asked him who I was, and as soon as he told 
them, they told him that everything I said was true and rushed to 
rescue me. 


Sa‘d left Makkah after this premature assault which made him 
realize the extent of brutality and savageness the Quraish were 
willing to exercise against unarmed people who called for good, truth, 
and peace. This assault sharpened his will, and he decided to do his 
utmost to help the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions. 


* * * 


400 


The Prophet (PBUH) emigrated to Al-Madiinah just after the 
Hijrah of his Companions. There, Sa‘d put his fortune at the 
disposal of the Muhaajiruun. Sad was generous by nature and 
heredity, being the son of ~Ubaadah Ibn Dulaim Ibn Haarithah, who 
was famous for his generosity in pagan times. Sa‘d's generosity 
turned into a sign of his deep-rooted and solid faith. 


Narrators commented upon his generosity and said, "The 
Prophet's houses were always full of food sent by Sa‘d.” They also 
said that a man from the Angaar used to invite one, two, or even 
three Muhaajiruun over for meals, whereas Sad Ibn “Ubaadah used 
to invite over 80 of Muhaajiruun. 


Solely for this, Sa‘d always implored Allah to bestow him with 
more of His good provision and used to invoke, "O Allah, little 
provision does not suffice me to be righteous or to act righteously." 
Therefore, it was justifiable for the Prophet (PBUH) to supplicate 
saying, "O Lord, bring Your blessings and mercy on the family of 
Sa‘d Ibn “Ubaadah." 


Sa‘d directed not only his fortune to the service of Islam, the 
straight and right religion, but also his energy and skills. He was a 
skilled marksman. He showed singular spirit of self-sacrifice during 
the battles under the Prophet's command (PBUH). Ibn *Abbaas said 
about him (May Allah be pleased with them both), "The Prophet 
(PBUH) used only two standards each time he was at war: the 
Muhaajiruun's flag with “Aliy Ibn Abiy Taalib and the Ansaar's flag 
with Sa‘d Ibn “Ubaadah. 


* * * 


It seemed that his characteristic strictness was part of his 
strong personality. He was stern in upholding what was right or 
what he believed to be his right. If he was convinced about a certain 
matter, he would rise to make it known in public in an unwavering 


401 


outspokenness and uncompromising firmness. This strictness, or 
should we say this extremism, was the reason behind many of his 
viewpoints which were called into question. 


* * * 


For instance, on the Day of the Conquest of Makkah, the 
Prophet (PBUH) assigned him to lead an army battalion. Hardly 
had he reached the outskirts of Makkah, the sacred town, when he 
shouted, "Today is the day of fierce battle. Today is the day of 
transgression." “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab heard his threat and hurried 
to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, " Messenger of Allah, listen to 
what Sa*‘d just said... He should not be entrusted with the 
command of the battalion that will attack the Quraish." The Prophet 
(PBUH) gave his assent and ordered “Umar to catch up with him 
and take his place in the command. 


It seems that when Sa‘d saw Makkah in a state of surrender 
and helplessness, he saw flashbacks of the abuse and torture that the 
believers and he himself had suffered at one time at the hands of 
disbelievers. He recalled all the wars they had waged against the 
Muslims who called for monotheism just because they believed that 
there is no god but Allah. His stern nature made him rejoice at the 
Quraish's calamity and vow revenge. 


* * * 


This sternness or extremism that was characteristic of Sa*d 
made him take his famous attitude on the Day of As-Saqiifah. After 
the Prophet (PBUH) died, a group of the Angaar met Sa‘d at Bani 
Saa‘adah's shaded meeting place to tell him that the Prophet's caliph 
must be one of the Angaar, as the caliphate was an honor in this 
world and in the next; therefore they craved to win that honor. But 
the Prophet (PBUH) had already chosen his caliph when he asked 
Abu Bakr to take his place as Imam (prayer leader) while he was 
sick. His Companions saw this and other special qualities enjoyed 
by Abu Bakr — for instance, he was the second of the two in the cave 
— as a sign for his right to the caliphate. 


402 


. On the one hand, “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, along with his 
companions, took the side of Abu Bakr and held fast to their opinion. 
On the other hand, Sa‘d Ibn ‘Ubaadah, along with his companions, 
took the other side and held fast to it. This angered many of the 
Prophet's Companions who held Ibn ‘Ubaadah responsible for such a 
dispute. 


However, Sad Ibn ‘Ubaadah was only being himself when he 
held fast to his viewpoint, for as we have already said, he always 
held tenaciously to his convictions and insisted on being outspoken 
and precise concerning exactly where he stood. This feature came out 
clearly at the Battle of Hunain before the Prophet himself. When the 
Muslims were victorious in battle, the Prophet (PBUH) always 
distributed the spoils of war among all the Muslims, yet on that 
particular day, he took special care of those whose hearts Allah had 
joined, namely, the elite who had committed themselves to Islam a 
short time before, so as to help them discipline themselves by this 
privilege. He did not give anything to the Muslims in whom Islam 
was deeply rooted, as he thought that their Islam sufficed them. He 
gave to the warriors who were in need. The Prophet's mere bounty 
was an honor most people competed for. The war booty became an 
important source of revenue on which the Muslims lived. Therefore, 
the Ansaar bitterly wondered what made the Prophet deprive them 
of the booty . 


Hassan Ibn Thaabit, the poet of the Ansaar, recited lines of 
poetry that mean: Go to the Prophet and say you are the best among 
all human beings. Why should you invite Sulaim tribe to take a share 
of war spoils although they are mere Muhaajiruun while you deprived 
the Angaar who gave shelter, support and help to Muhaajiruun. 
Allah called them the Ansaar because they believed in and supported 
the religion of guidance in the time of fierce struggle and war. They 
rushed to strive in the way of Allah and endured difficulties and 
hardships without getting weary or losing faith. 


403 


In those lines, the poet of the Prophet and the Ansaar 
expressed quite eloquently the embarrassment and disappointment 
the Ansaar felt when the Prophet gave his Companions the spoils of 
war and did not give them anything. 


The leader of the Angaar, Sa*d Ibn “Ubaadah, realized the 
dilemma they were in, as he heard people talk about it secretly. This 
did not appeal to him, so urged by his candor, he went immediately 
to the Prophet (PBUH) and said, "O Messenger of Allah, this group 
of the Ansaar are displeased with what you did with the spoils of 
war. You have distributed war booty among your people and were 
most generous to the Arab tribes, but you did not give the Ansaar 
anything." 


Thus, the frank man got it off his chest and gave the Prophet a 
candid account of the situation. The Prophet (PBUH) asked him, 
"What is your opinion about it?” Sa‘d answered with the same 
bluntness, "I have the same viewpoint as my people." Then the 
Prophet (PBUH) asked him to gather the Angaar. We must narrate 
the story to its very end as it is irresistably fascinating. 


When the Prophet (PBUH) came where the Ansaar gathered, he 
looked at their disgruntled faces, and his smile brightened with 
gratitude and appreciation. Then he said, "O Angaar, I heard that 
an incident that happened recently made you feel ill at ease. Now, 
didn't I find you ignorant and guided you to the way of Allah. Didn't 
I find you poor and Allah enriched you of His bounty? And didn't I 
find you enemies and Allah joined your hearts together?" 


They answered, "Indeed, Allah and His Prophet are far more 
generous and better." 


The Prophet then said, "Don't you have anything to say?” 


They answered, "There is nothing to be said but that Allah and 
His Prophet have the grace and bounty.” 


404 


The Prophet (PBUH) then said, "By Allah, you could have 
justly said, We believed in you at a time when all called you a liar. 
We supported you at a time when you were frustrated. We gave you 
our money at a time when you were poor and we even sheltered you 
at a time when you were homeless. O Ansaar, are you upset for a 
thing so trivial and worldly that I gave to some people so as to join 
their hearts to Islam and left you out of it, believing that your Islam 
sufficed you? Is it not enough for you that the rest of the people will 
go home with a sheep or a camel, whereas you will return 
accompanied by the Prophet's love and appreciation? By Allah, if 
I were not one of the Muhaajiruun I would rather be one of the 
Ansaar, and if people moved in different ways, I would choose the 
way taken by the Ansaar. Allah, do have mercy on the Angaar, their 
children, and their children’s children." 


By the time the Prophet (PBUH) concluded his words, their 
beards were wet with tears, for the words of the great Prophet filled 
their hearts with tranquility and enriched their souls. All of them 
including Sa*d cried out, "It is enough for us to have the Prophet's 
love as our reward." 


In the first days of “Umar's caliphate, Sad went to the 
Commander of the Faithful and said with his extreme candor, "By 
Allah, we prefer your companion Abu Bakr over you. By Allah, | 
cannot stand to live near you." “Umar calmly answered, " Anyone 
who hates his company should seek a better one elsewhere." Sa*d 
said, "I will indeed seek better company somewhere else." 


* * * 


Sa*d words to ‘Umar were not an expression of hate or spite, 
for the man who was satisfied with the Prophet's love as his reward 
cannot possibly deny loyality to such a man as “Umar, whom the 
Prophet (PBUH) had always cherished and honored. It was just that 
Sa*d Ibn ‘Ubaadah did not want to wait around for some event to 


405 


come up and result in an inevitable dispute between him and the 
Commaner of the Faithful “Umar Ibn Al- Khattaab, a thing he did 
not want or accept. Sa‘d was one of the Companions whom the 
Qur'aan described as "merciful among themselves." He traveled to 
Syria. Shortly after he had settled in the Hauran plateau, he died 
and went back to the Lord the Most Merciful. 


406 


(47) 
USAAMAH IBN ZAID 
The Beloved Son of the Beloved 


‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, Commander of the Faithful, sat down 
to distribute money from the treasury among the Muslims. 


It was “Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar's turn, and “Umar gave him his 
share. Then it was the turn of Usaamah Ibn Zaid. ‘Umar gave him 
double of what he gave his son “Abd Allah. As ‘Umar gave people 
according to their merit and endeavor, ~Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar was 
afraid that his position was not as highly acknowledged as he 
desired, to be one of the closest to Allah through his obedience, 
endeavor, piety, and asceticism. 


Therefore, he asked his father, "You preferred Usaamah, 
although I experienced with the Messenger of Allah what he did not." 
“Umar answered, "Usaamah was more beloved by the Prophet 
(PBUH) than you were, and his father was more beloved by the 
Prophet (PBUH) than your father was.” 


Who was it, together with his father that was so close to the 
Prophet's heart and love? It was a high position which Ibn ‘Umar 
did not reach, nor did his father, ‘Umar himself. 


Who was it? It was Usaamah Ibn Zaid who has been called 
among the Prophet's Companions "The Beloved Son of the Beloved". 


His father was Zaid Ibn Haarithah*, the Prophet's servant, who 
preferred the Prophet (PBUH) over own his father, mother,and kin. 
He was with him when the Prophet (PBUH) stood in front of a large 
group of Companions saying, "I let you bear witness that Zaid is my 
son, inheriting from me and I inheriting from him." 


* His biography has previously been mentioned. 


407 


His name remained Zaid Ibn Muhammad until the practice of 
child adoption was abolished by the Qur'aan. Usaamah is his son. 
His mother was Umm Aiman, the Prophet's servant and nurse maid. 


Usaamah's physical appearance made him appear a good-for- 
nothing. Historians and narrators described him as being dark- 
skinned and snub-nosed. By these two words, not more, did history 
summarize Usaamah's physical appearance. 


However, since when did Islam ever care about a person's 
physical characteristics? Was it not the Prophet (PBUH) who said, 
"Maybe a Muslim's hair is unkempt and his feet covered with dust 
and his clothes are not neat, but, if he swore by Allah he would fulfill 
his oath?" 


Therefore, let us set his appearance aside. Leave his dark skin 
and snub nose alone; nothing of that sort has weight in Islam. Let us 
instead take stock of his loyalty. How was his devotion? How was 
his virtue? How was his honesty? How was his piety? How great 
was his soul? On account of the qualities of his soul, he reached a 
worthiness that made him eligible to receive the Prophet's infinite love 
and acknowledgement: " Usaamah Ibn Zaid is the most beloved to me 
and I wish him to be one of the virtuous. I recommend you to treat 
him well." 


Usaamah (May Allah be pleased with him) had all the great 
characteristics which enabled him to be so close to the Prophet's heart 
and beloved in his eyes. He was the son of two generous Muslims 
belonging to the first converts to Islam who, at the same time, were 
the closest and most loyal to the Messenger of Allah (PBUH). 


As one of the true sons of Islam, he was nurtured from his first 
days by Islam's pure nature without experiencing the murkiness of the 
pagan period. 


408 


Despite his young and tender age, he was a firm believer and a 
staunch Muslim fulfilling all the duties of his faith with deep loyalty 
and an unbreakable will. With great intellect and humility, limits to 
his devotion to Allah and His Prophet (PBUH) could not found. 


Furthermore, he represented the victims of all kinds of 
discrimination who were saved by Islam. How could this dark- 
skinned, snub-nosed fellow attract the heart of the Prophet (PBUH) 
and Muslims to such an elevated rank! This could only be possible 
when Islam corrected human norms and values dealing with 
discrimination against people:< Surely the most honourable of you in 
the sight of Allah is the most pious of you > (49 : 13). 


On the day of the Conquest of Makkah, the Prophet's 
Companion who was riding behind him on horseback was that dark- 
skinned, snub-nosed Usaamah Ibn Zaid. Among the most victorious 
days of Islam was the day of the Conquest of Makkah. On that day, 
on the Prophet's right and left were Bilaal and Usaamah, two dark- 
skinned men; however Allah's word which they carried in their pure, 
virtuous hearts made them deserving of all kinds of merit and 
elevated position. 


Usaamah had not yet reached the age of 20 when the Prophet 
(PBUH) ordered him to be head of an army which had among its 
soldiers Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. A growl spread around among a 
group of Muslims who were distressed by this matter and who found 
it too much for a youth such as Usaamah Ibn Zaid to command an 
army which included a large number of Muhaajiruun and elderly 
Angaar. Their whispers reached the Messenger of Allah (PBUH), so 
he ascended the pulpit, thanked and praised Allah and then said, 
"Some people criticized Usaamah's army command; they criticized 
his father's command before him. His father deserved to be the 
commander as well as Usaamah. He is the most beloved to me next 
to his father, and I hope he is among the virtuous ones. I request you 
to treat him well." 


409 


The Prophet (PBUH) died before the army set off towards its 
destination; however the Prophet had left his wise testament to his 
Companions: "Fulfill Usaamah’'s commission. Fulfil Usaamah's 
commission." 


Despite the new circumstances created by the Prophet's death, 
Abu Bakr As-Siddiiq, the first caliph, insisted upon fulfilling the 
Prophet's testament. Usaamah's army set off to its destination; the 
caliph only requested Usaamah to allow “Umar to stay behind to be 
with him in Al-Madiinah. 


At the same time, the Roman (Byzantine) emperor heard the 
news of the Prophet's death and that an army headed by Usaamah 
Ibn Zaid was attacking the borders of Syria. He could not hide his 
astonishment and wonder about the strength of the Muslims, whose 
plans and potential were not affected by the Prophet's death. 
Consequently, the Romans abstained from utilizing the Syrian borders 
as a leaping point upon Islam's center in the Arabian Peninsula, and 
thereby their power began to shrink. : 

Usaamah's army returned safely without any casualities so that 
the Muslims said, " We've never seen a safer army than Usaamah's.” 


* * * 


It was by the Prophet (PBUH) himself that Usaamah had been 
taught the lesson of his life, a very wise lesson. Usaamah lived 
according to its wisdom from the Prophet's death until he himself left 
our world during the latter phase of Mu’aawiyah’'s caliphate. 


Two years before the Prophet's death, Usaamah was sent by 
the Prophet (PBUH) to lead a detachment which was meeting some 
polytheists attacking Islam and its followers. It was the first time for 
Usaamah to be appointed head of a detachment. He accomplished 
his duty successfully and victoriously. News of his victory preceded 
his arrival and the Prophet (PBUH) was indeed glad. 


410 


Let us leave the rest of the story to be narrated by Usaamah 
himself: When I reached the Prophet (PBUH) the proclamation of 
good news had already reached him. The Prophet's face beamed 
jubilantly. He asked me to sit closer to him and said, "Tell me." | 
went on telling and narrating. I mentioned to him that at one point the 
polytheists were defeated and I could reach a man, at whom I 
pointed my spear. The man said, "There is no god but Allah. 
Nevertheless I pierced and killed him with my lance. The Prophet's 
attitude changed. He said, "Woe unto you! How dare you do that 
when he said, There is no god but Allah. Woe unto you! How dare 
you do that when he said, There is no god but Allah." He continued 
saying that to such an extent that I wished to rid myself of all my 
deeds and embrace Islam afresh on that day. No, by Allah, I will 
never fight anyone saying, There is no god but Allah, after what I 
have heard from the Prophet (PBUH). 


* * + 


Usaamah was guided by the wisdom of this lesson throughout 
his life. 


What a wise lesson! A lesson revealing the Prophet's humanity, 
his justice, the eminence of his principles , the greatness of his faith 
and manners. Despite the fact that it was a polytheist warrior who 
had been killed by Usaamah, the killing was much regretted by the 
Prophet (PBUH). 


At the same moment this warrior said, "There is no god but 
Allah," he was holding a sword in his right hand, a sword upon 
which pieces of Muslim flesh were still hanging. He said it to save his 
soul or to give himself another chance to change his direction or 
resume fighting. 


Nevertheless, because he said it, his blood became inviolate and 
his life secure and safe at the same moment and for the same reason, 
whatever his intention or his inward desire may have been. Usaamah 
understood the lesson fully. If the Prophet (PBUH) forbids the killing 
of a man in such a situation for the reason that he said, "There is no 


411 


god but Allah," what about the true believers and true Muslims? 
Therefore, Usaamah held a neutral position during the period of the 
civil strife between Imam *Aliy with his followers on one hand and 
Mu‘aawiyah on the other. 


He loved “Aliy very much and could see the truth on his side. 
But after having been blamed by the Prophet (PBUH) for the murder 
of a polytheist who said, "There is no god but Allah," how could 
he ever kill a Muslim believing in Allah and His Prophets? Therefore, 
he sent a message to “Aliy saying, "If you were in a lion's jaw, I would 
love to enter it with you. But I've never seen a situation like this 
before.” 


He kept within doors during the whole period of the fighting 
and war. When some of his companions came to argue with him over 
his decision, he simply said, "I will never fight anyone saying, There 
is no god but Allah." 


Once, one cited him the verse < And continue fighting them 
until there is no more persecution and GOD’s Religion prevails > 
(2:193). He replied, " Those are the polytheists and we fought them 
until there wasn't any persecution and Allah's religion prevailed." 


* * * 


In A.H. 54 Usaamah longed to meet with Allah. On that day 
the gates of Paradise opened to receive one of the most reverent and 
pious believers. 


412 


(48) 
“ABD AR- RAHMAN IBN ABI BAKR 
A Hero to the End ! 


He was a clear image and reflection of Arab chivalry in its 
depth. His father was As-Siddiiq, the first convert, an incomparable 
believer, one of two who were in the cave. Despite all that, his son 
“Abd Ar-Rahman stuck persistently and firmly to the pagan religion 
of his clan and to the idols of the Quraish. 


At the Battle of Badr, he fought on the side of the Quraish. 
During the Battle of Uhud he was in the forefront of the spearmen 
recruited by the Quraish to combat the Muslims. 


Before any fight there was a traditional dueling round (single 
combat). “Abd Ar-Rahman stood out asking the Muslims whom they 
were going to choose to fight with him. His father, Abu Bakr Ag- 
Siddiiq (May Allah be pleased with him) rushed out to combat his 
son. However, the Prophet (PBUH) held him back, hindering him 
from doing so. 


* * * 


Any true Arab is primarily characterized by his loyalty to his 
conviction. Being convinced with a faith or an idea means being 
enslaved by such conviction; there is no way to rid himself of it, 
unless a new conviction fills his mind and soul without deceit or 
falsification. 


Despite “Abd Ar-Rahman’s respect for his father, his trust in 
his father's rationality, and the greatness of his manners and soul, 
despite all that, his loyalty to his conviction proved to be superior. 
His father's conversion to Islam did not tempt him to change his 
conviction. 


413 


He remained unchanged, carrying out the responsibilities of his 
faith and conviction, defending the idols of the Quraish and fighting 
under their standard, the way brave warriors do. 


As for the noble and powerful men of that type, truth prevails 
eventually, no matter how long it takes. Their noble essence, the light 
of their sincerity is soon going to guide them, uniting them with 
guidance and blessing. 


The clock of fate struck to announce a new birth for “Abd Ar- 
Rahman. Light of guidance lit up sweeping away all murkiness, 
darkness, and devices inherited from pagan days. He soon could 
visualize Allah, the One and Only, in all surrounding creatures and 
things. It was here that guidance deepened its roots within his soul, it 
was here he became a Muslim. 


Without delay he set off towards the Prophet (PBUH). He 
became one who returns ever to the religion of truth. Abu Bakr's face 
beamed with happiness and delight seeing his son swearing the oath 
of allegiance to the Prophet (PBUH). 


He had been a true polytheist, but now he was a true Muslim. 
No greed directed his steps, no fear pushed him, just a rational, 
rightly-guided conviction blessed by Allah's guidance and success. 


Soon he started to replace previous deeds with doing the best, 
striving in the cause of Allah, His Prophet and the faithful. 


* * * 


During the whole period of the Prophet (PBUH) and the era of 
caliphs who succeeded him, “Abd Ar-Rahman never missed a battle 
nor refrained from taking part in any jihaad. 


His endeavor and striving on the Day of Al-Yamaamah will 
never be forgotten. His firm resistance and bravery played a great 
role in achieving victory against the apostate army of Musailamah. It 
was he, “Abd Ar-Rahman, who killed Muhkam Ibn At-Tufail, 


414 


Musailamah's schemer and the main guard of the castle inside which 
the apostate army took refuge. 


As soon as Muhkam fell down from the hard stroke of ‘Abd 
Ar-Rahman, all those around him scattered, leaving a wide entrance 
open so the Muslim warriors could hasten inside. 


Under the standard of Islam “Abd Ar-Rahman's habits became 
more bright and shining. He was loyal to his conviction, completely 
determined to carry out and follow what was right and true, refusing 
all kinds of flattery and servility. All these manners were the essence 
of his personality as well as his whole life. He never abandoned his 
principles even when tempted by a desire or influenced by a fear. 


Even on that terrilble day, when Mu*‘aawiyah decided to force 
the pledge to Yaziid by the sword. On that day, a message was 
sent to Marwaan, the governor of Al-Madiinah. It included the oath 
of allegiance which was to be read aloud in the mosque so that all 
the Muslims would hear it. Marwaan did what was ordered. When 
he finished reading it, ‘Abd Ar-Rahman Ibn Abi Bakr turned the 
atmosphere of silence and depression which covered the mosque into 
one of loud opposition and firm resistance saying, "By Allah, it's not 
the welfare of Muhammad's nation that you are seeking. On the 
contrary, you want to turn it into a Heraclian rule. When Heraclius 
dies another follows.” 


‘Abd Ar-Rahman could clearly see the dangers awaiting Islam if 
Mu’ aawiyah was to carry out his desire. He could see how the 
transfer of power within Islam was changing from one based on 
national consultation by which the nation chooses its leader , to one 
of autocracy, by which emperors are imposed upon the people, one 
after the other. 


“Abd Ar-Rahman had hardly finished these firm and loud 
resisting words when a group of Muslims hurried to support him. 


415 


Leading them were Al-Hussain Ibn “Aliy, “Abd Allah Ibn Az-Zubair 
and ~Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar. 


However for some compelling reason which occurred later on, 
they all were forced to hold a position of silence towards this pledge 
of allegiance which Mu‘aawiyah decided to take by force of sword. 


But “Abd Ar-Rahman continued to resist loudly. Mu*aawiyah 
sent him someone with 100,000 dirhams, hoping to please him. 


Ibn As-Siddiiq threw the money and said frankly to 
Mu‘aawiyah's messenger, "Go back to him and tell him, it's not “Abd 
Ar-Rahman who is going to buy his life by losing his faith." 


As soon as he heard the news that Mu‘aawiyah had set off 
towards Al-Madiinah, he left it heading to Makkah. 


Allah wanted to save him the temptation of such a situation 
and its bad results. He had hardly reached the borders of Makkah 
when his soul submitted itself to Allah's appeal. Men carried the 
body and buried it in Makkah, which had witnessed his pagan past 
but also witnessed his conversion to Islam, the conversion of an 
honest, free, and brave man. 


416 


(49) 
“ABD ALLAH IBN “AMR IBN AL-A4S 
The Submissive Returner to Allah ! 


The submissive, repentant, ever returning worshiper whom we 
are going to talk about is “Abd Allah Ibn “Amr Ibn Al-* Aas. 


Just as his father was famous for his rationality and cunning 
tricks, so was he famous for his highly elevated position among 
worshipers and hermits. His whole life was devoted to worship. 
Days and nights were not enough for his acts of worship. 


* * * 


He embraced Islam before his father. Since the day he swore 
the oath of allegiance, his heart shone like sunlight by means of 
Allah's light and the light of obedience. 


He devoted himself to reciting and understanding the Glorious 
Qur'aan, so that when it was completely revealed he would have 
learned it all by heart. He did not recite it merely by power of a 
retentive memory, reproducing a book learned by heart, but rather he 
lived according to its laws, filled his heart with its magnificence, was 
its obedient servant and responded to its appeals. He then 
dedicated himself to its reading and recitation as well as 
understanding it, walking most delightfully in its mellow orchards, 
pleased with a joyful soul, happy with its holy verses, with eyes 
crying in anxiety and fear due to the effect of its verses. 


“Abd Allah was created to be a worshiping saint. Nothing 
whatsoever could distract him from what he was created for and 
guided to. If the army of Islam waged jihaad against the polytheists 
who had been attacking Islam, he could always be found insistent in 
the front rows, aspiring to die as a martyr. It was the aspiration of 
a loving soul and the insistence of a lover. When the war was over, 
where was he to be found ? 


417 


There in the great mosque or the small mosque beside his house, 
fasting in the daytime, praying at night. His tongue did not know any 
worldly talk no matter how legitimate it was. His tongue did not 
know anything but invoking of Allah, the reciting the Qur'aan, 
praising Allah, and asking Him His forgiveness and remission of sins. 


It is worthwhile to know how deep his worship and asceticism 
was. The Prophet (PBUH) found himself once forced to interfere in 
order to limit ~Abd Allah's extremism in worship. 


Therefore, the moral which can be abstracted from ~Abd Allah's 
life is twofold. It demonstrates how excessively the human soul can 
be filled with an extraordinary ability to reach utmost degrees of 
devotion, worship, and virtue. On the other hand, it demonstrates 
Islam's concern to maintain a middle course and moderation, even 
when perfection is aspired to, lest the human soul should lose its zeal 
and aspiration and in order to maintain a healthy and safe body. 


It reached the Prophet that “Abd Allah spent his life in a 
uniform manner. If there was no battle to join, then it was non-stop 
worshiping, fasting, praying, and reciting the Qur'aan. 


The Prophet (PBUH) sent for him, appealing to him to be 
moderate. The Prophet (PBUH) said, "Is it true what I heard, that 
you fast every day without eating (without breaking your fasting by 
one or two days) and that you pray all night without sleeping? It's 
enough to fast just three days every month." ~Abd Allah said, "I can 
bear more than that !" The Prophet (PBUH) said, "It's enough to fast 
two days each week." “Abd Allah said, “I can bear more than 
that." The Prophet (PBUH) said, “Then, why don't you fast the best 
fasting of all, Daawud's (David's) fast; he fasted one day and ate on 
the other." 


The Prophet (PBUH) continued asking him, " I've been informed 
that you recite the whole Qur'aan in one night. I'm afraid when you 
get older you will feel bored reciting it. Recite it once each month. 
Recite it once every ten days. Recite it once every three days." Then 


418 


he said, "I fast and eat. I pray and sleep. I marry women. Whoever 
abstains from following my path, indeed, is not of me.” 


“Abd Allah lived long and when he got older and weaker he 
always remembered the Prophet's advice saying, "If only I had 
accepted the Prophet's advice." 


* + + 


It is not easy to find a believer of that sort engaged in a war 
fought by two Muslim parties against each other. How was it 
possible that his feet carried him from Al-Madiinah to As-Siffiin 
where he joined Mu‘aawiyah's army in the battle against Imam “Aliy? 
The more we contemplate “Abd Allah's position, the more we will 
find it worthy of your respect and honor. 


We saw how “Abd Allah was engaged in worship in a way 
which truly endangered his life. His father was always concerned 
about this matter. Therefore, he often complained to the Prophet 
(PBUH). On that particular instance when the Prophet (PBUH) 
asked “Abd Allah to be moderate in worship, clearly suggesting 
suitable intervals, “Abd Allah's father “Amr was present. The 
Prophet (PBUH) put “Abd Allah's hand into his father's saying, " Do 
as I ordered you and obey your father." 


Although “Abd Allah was obedient to his father due to his faith 
and belief, the Prophet's order to him in such a way and on such an 
occasion had a very special impact on him. “Abd Allah lived his 
whole life always remembering this short statement, "Do as I ordered 
you and obey you father.” 


+ * * 


Days and years passed. Mu‘aawiyah in Syria refused to swear 
the oath of allegiance to “Aliy. ~Aliy refused to submit to an illegal 
rebellion. War broke out between the two Muslim parties. The Battle 
of Al-Jamal passed, and now it was the turn of As-Siffiin. 


419 


~Amr Ibn Al-*Aas had chosen to fight on Mu‘aawiyah’s side. 
Knowing how much people trusted and acknowledged his son's faith, 
he found it very beneficial for Mu’ aawiyah’s party to convince him to 
join and engage in the war. In addition, “Amr was always optimistic 
whenever he had ‘Abd Allah beside him in times of war. He could 
not forget his striving and endeavor in the conquest of Syria and on 
the Day of Yarmuuk. 


When he intended to set out towards Siffiin he appealed to his 
son to join saying, "O “Abd Allah, get ready, you're going to fight with 
us." ‘Abd Allah replied, "How? The Prophet (PBUH) has entrusted 
me never to hold a sword to a Muslim's neck." By means of his 
cunning tricks, Amr tried to convince his son that they just intended 
to kill ‘Uthmaan’'s murderers and to take revenge. 


Then he surprised his son with the following words, "O ~Abd 
Allah, do you remember the last thing the Prophet committed you to, 
when he put your hand over mine saying, Obey your father? I order 
you now to join us and fight with us." 


‘Abd Allah went obediently but with the deep intention to 
neither carry a sword nor kill a Muslim. But how was that going to 
be possible? For the time being, he was just joining his father, but 
when the fight starts let Allah do as He wills. 


It was a hard and fierce battle. Historians argue and differ 
among themselves, whether “Abd Allah joined the battle from the 


very beginning or not. 


We think that he joined it from the very beginning, because the 
battle had hardly begun when something happened which forced 
~Abd Allah to stand openly and clearly against the whole war and 
against Mu*‘aawiyah. 


*Ammaar Ibn Yaasir, who was well respected by the 
Companions, was fighting on the side of Imam “Aliy. Once in the far 
remote past the Prophet (PBUH) had forseen ~Ammaar's murder. 


420 


This was in the days when the Prophet (PBUH) and the 
Companions were building their mosque at Al-Madiinah after the 
Hijrah. The rocks were extremely big and even the strongest ones 
could not carry more than one at a time. However, *Ammaar was so 
cheerful and glad that he went on carrying two rocks at a time. The 
Prophet (PBUH) looked at him with tearful eyes saying, "Woe upon 
the son of Sumaiyah. He is going to be killed by the unjust party." All 
the Companions who took part in the building heard the prophecy 
and remembered it well. “Abd Allah Ibn “Amr was one of those who 
heard it. 


At the beginning of the battle between ~Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah’'s 
parties, “Ammaar ascended a hill shouting, "Today is the day that we 
are going to meet Muhammad and his Companions." 


A group of Mu‘aawiyah's party committed themselves to killing 
“Ammmaar, so they pierced him with a lance, whereby he fell as a 
martyr. 


The news of ~Ammaar's death spread rapidly. ‘Abd Allah 
stood up agitatedly and said, "Is it true that ~Ammaar has been killed 
? Did you do it? That means you are the unjust party! You are the 
mislead warriors!" Like a portent he burst into the army, 
discouraging the fighters, shouting loudly, "You are the unjust party 
as long as it's you who killed “Ammaar. The Prophet (PBUH) 
foresaw his murder by the unjust party some 27 years ago." 


“Abd Allah's words soon reached Mu‘aawiyah, who sent for 
‘Amr and his son. He said to “Amr, “Can't you stop your mad man?" 
“Abd Allah said, "I'm not mad, but I heard the Prophet (PBUH) once 
saying to “Ammaar, ‘You will be killed by the unjust party.” 
Mu‘aawiyah continued asking, "Why, then, did you join our party?" 
“Abd Allah said, "Because the Prophet (PBUH) asked me to obey my 
father and I obeyed him in joining you, but I didn't fight." 


While they were arguing, someone entered asking Mu*aawiyah 
to permit the entrance of “Ammaar's murderer. At that moment *Abd 
Allah shouted, "Let him in and announce the 'good news' he is in hell.” 


Hereby Mu‘aawiyah lost his temper despite his calmness and 
mildness. He shouted to “Amr, "Can't you hear what he is saying?" 


‘Abd Allah continued to ensure Mu*‘aawiyah that what he was 
saying was the truth and that the murderers were no more than unjust 
tyrants. Then he turned to his father and said, "Had it not been for 
the Prophet's order to obey you, I would not have gone out with 


you. 


While inspecting their army, Mu‘aawiyah and “Amr were 
astonished and terrified to hear all the people talking about the 
Prophet's prophecy to “Ammaar, You are going to be killed by the 
unjust party. 


*Amr and Mu‘aawiyah were afraid that this mere grumble was 
soon going to turn into a revolt against Mu’aawiyah. They thought 
together till they found a cunning trick. They spread the following 
words among the people: "Yes, the Prophet (PBUH) said to “Ammaar 
on that day, You'll be killed by the unjust party. The Prophet's 
prophecy is true. ~Ammaar has been killed. But who killed him? 
The true murderers are those who asked him to go out to fight." 


In the midst of such confusion and turmoil, any logic could 
easily be spread. In this way Mu‘aawiyah's and ~Amr's logic 
prevailed. The battle continued. “Abd Allah went back to his 
mosque and to his worship. 


* * * 


He lived a life filled with nothing else than worship and 
adoration. Nevertheless, the mere act of going out to the battlefield 
always remained a reason for worry. He never remembered this act 
without weeping and saying, "What did I have to do with As-Siffiin?" 
Why did I bother myself with the killing of Muslims?" 


* + * 


422 


One day, while sitting with some companions in the Prophet's 
mosque, Al-Hussain Ibn “Aliy (May Allah be pleased with him) 
passed by and they greeted each other. When Al-Hussain went away 
“Abd Allah said to those sitting with him, "Would you like to know 
the human being most beloved to the angels? It's the one who just 
passed by, Al-Hussain Ibn ~Aliy. He has not talked to me since the 
Day of As-Siffiin. I would like him to talk to me more than I desire 
all the blessings of this world." 


He decided with Abu Sa‘iid Al-Khudriy to visit Al-Hussain. 
There at Al-Hussain’s house the meeting of these two great men took 
place. “Abd Allah began to talk. When he mentioned As-Siffiin, Al- 
Hussain asked him scoldingly, "You, did you join the fight on 
Mu‘aawiyah's side?" ‘Abd Allah said, "One day ~Amr Ibn Al-Aas 
complained to the Prophet (PBUH) saying, "Abd Allah fasts the 
whole day and prays all night.’ Then the Prophet said to me, 'O 
“Abd Allah, pray and sleep, fast and eat. Obey you father.’ When it 
was the day of As-Siffiin, my father swore by Allah that I had to go 
out with him. I went out, but, by Allah, I didn't pierce with a lance, I 
didn't fight with a sword and I didn't shoot any arrows." 


At the age of 72, while praying in his mosque, asking for Allah's 
forgiveness, praising Allah gratefully, he was invited to join the 
eternal voyage. Filled with a longing aspiration he responded. His 
soul left the world joyfully to join his brethren who had preceded 
him. The announcer of good news proclaimed from Heaven, < "O 
soul at peace, return to your Lord, well pleased and well pleasing. 
Enter you among My servants, and enter into My Paradise!"> (89:27- 
30). 


423 


(50) 
ABU SUFYAAN IBN AIHAARITH 
From Darkness to Light ! 


Here is another Abu Sufyaan, a different one than Abu Sufyaan 
Ibn Harb. His story is one of being guided after straying from the 
path of truth, a story of love after hatred, happiness after suffering. 
It is the story of Allah's infinite mercy and how it opened the gates to 
someone seeking Allah's refuge after a long journey full of hardship 
and suffering. 


Can you imagine, Ibn Al-Haarith spent 20 years in a continuous 
fight against Islam! Twenty years from the beginning of the revelation 
until the Day of the Conquest. During this whole period Abu 
Sufyaan was encouraging the Quraish and their allies, attacking the 
Prophet (PBUH) by means of satires, never absent when a battle or 
fight was fought. His three brothers, Nawfal, Rabii‘ah, and “Abd 
Allah, converted to Islam before him. 


The Abu Sufyaan whom we are talking about was the cousin of 
the Prophet (PBUH), as he was the son of Al-Haarith Ibn ~Abd Al- 
Muttalib. Furthermore, he was the foster brother of the Prophet 
(PBUH), having been suckled for a few days by Haliimah Al- 
Sa*diyah, the Prophet's wet-nurse. 


One day destiny called him to meet his happy fate. He called 
his son Ja*far and said to his men that they were both going to travel. — 
"Where to, Ibn Al-Haarith? What is your destination?" "To the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) to submit ourselves to Allah, Lord of the 
Worlds." 


With a repenting heart he began to ride his horse. At a place 
called Al-Abuwaa’', he could see a great army approaching. Soon he 
realized that it was the Prophet (PBUH) moving forward to enter 
Makkah. He began to search for a way out. The Messenger of Allah 
(PBUH) had allowed the Companions to shed Abu Sufyaan’s blood 


424 


because of his long continuous fight against Islam, a fight in which he 
used his sword as well as his tongue. 


If anyone in the approaching army saw him, he would no doubt 
take revenge. Therefore Abu Sufyaan had to find a clever way which 
would enable him to meet the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) first before 
any Muslim could see him. He disguised himself, hiding all his 
features, then took his son and walked a while until he could clearly 
see the Prophet (PBUH), who at that moment was approaching 
amidst a large number of the Companions. 


Suddenly, Abu Sufyaan threw himself between the Prophet's 
hands, removing his disguise. As soon as the Prophet (PBUH) 
recognized him, he turned his face. Abu Sufyaan turned and 
approached him from another direction, in vain; the Prophet turned 
his face again. Abu Sufyaan and his son Ja‘far both shouted, " We 
bear witness that there is no god but Allah.We bear witness that 
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah." They came nearer saying, "O 
Prophet, no reproach!" The Prophet (PBUH) replied, "No reproach 
shall be upon you, Abu Sufyaan." Then the Prophet (PBUH) handed 
him over to “Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib and said to him, "Teach your cousin 
ablution, the Sunnah and take him away right now." ~Aliy took him 
and soon returned. The Prophet (PBUH) told “Aliy, " Tell people 
that the Prophet (PBUH) is pleased with Abu Sufyaan, so be pleased 
with him." 


It was nothing more than a moment which Allah blessed in 
order to close a period of suffering, misery, hardship, and error while 
opening the gates of infinite mercy. 


He nearly converted to Islam when, during the Battle of Badr, 
while fighting on the side of the Quraish, he saw something that 
confused his mind. 


During that battle Abu Lahab stayed behind, sending Al-Aags 
Ibn Hishaam in his place. Abu Lahab was waiting eagerly to hear the 
news when the shocking defeat was announced. He was sitting near 


425 


the well of Zamzam in the middle of a group of the Quraish, when a 
horseman approached. It was Abu Sufyaan Ibn Al-Haarith. Abu 
Lahab did not give him a chance to rest, but asked him immediately, 
"Come nearer, my cousin. You have the latest news ! How was it?” 
Abu Sufyaan Ibn Al-Haarith said, “By Allah, we had hardly begun 
fighting when it was as if we offered them our bodies, let them do 
with us whatever they wanted, let them fight us as they pleased, took 
us prisoners as they liked. I swear, by Allah, I do not blame the 
Quraish, as we met white men riding piebald horses filling the space 
between heaven and earth. Nothing is like to them, nothing could 
stop them.” 


Abu Sufyaan surely meant that angels were fighting on the 
Prophet's side. Why is it then that Abu Sufyaan did not submit 
himself to Allah at that time after having seen what he first 
described? 


Doubt paves the way to certainty. The more obstinate and 
opinionated his doubt, the firmer and more persistent his conviction. 


Finally, it was the day of guidance and certainty, the day of his 
conversion as previously mentioned. 


+ * * 


From the very beginning, from the first moments after his 
conversion, he began to strive and to worship as if entering a race 
with time, hoping to erase all traces of his past to compensate for 
what he had missed during that time. 


He took part in all the battles after the Day of the Conquest. 
On the Day of Hunain a very dangerous trap was prepared by the 
polytheists, who attacked the Muslims so fiercefully that a great deal 
of Muslim warriors lost their reason and retreated, but the Prophet 
(PBUH) stood firm appealing, "O people, I'm the Prophet, it's not a 
lie. I'm the son of “Abd Al-Muttalib." 


426 


During those fearful moments, a small group, not losing their 
reason, continued fighting. Among them was Abu Sufyaan and his 
son Jafar. Abu Sufyaan was holding the bridle of the Prophet's 
horse, but when he saw what happened, he felt deeply that his 
chance had finally come, the chance of dying as a martyr in the cause 
of Allah, between the Prophet's hands. 


He held the horse's bridle with one hand while cutting the 
throats of the polytheists with the other. 


The Muslims regrouped around the Prophet (PBUH) and Allah 
blessed them with victory. Although the fight was over, when the 
Prophet (PBUH) looked around he could see a faithful believer still 
holding his horse's bridle. It was Abu Sufyaan, who had not left his 
place since the battle began. The Prophet (PBUH) glanced and 
asked, "Who is it? My brother Abu Si fyaan Ibn Al-Haarith?" 


Immediately after hearing the word "brother" Abu Sufyaan's 
heart was filled with joy and dignity. He knelt down and kissed the 
Prophet's feet, crying. His poetic sensibility was so much 
moved that he began to describe his joy and happiness because Allah 
had. blessed him with so much bravery and success. 


* * * 


Abu Sufyaan turned to worship and adore Allah very 
persistently. It was after the Prophet's death when his soul longed 
for its meeting with the Prophet. He had desired for a long time to 
die soon, to the extent that people saw him digging out his grave at 
Al-Baqii*, a grave which he prepared and arranged in a very nice 
way. When people expressed their astonishment he just said, "I'm 


preparing my grave.” 


Three days later he was lying at home, when his relatives began 
to cry and weep. When he opened his eyes, he said in complete 


tranquility, "Don't cry. I didn't commit a single sin since I converted 
to Islam." 


Before his head fell upon his chest he said his last farewell to 
the world. 


428 


(51) 
“UMRAAN IBNHUSAIN 
The Angels’ Resemblance 


It was in the year of Khaibar that he turned to the Prophet 
(PBUH), swearing to him the oath of allegiance. Since the moment he 
put his right hand into the Prophet's right hand, his hand became 
subject to respect. He promised himself to use it only in good and 
virtuous deeds, an attitude displaying how much sensitivity this 
person enjoyed. 


“‘Umraan was a clear image of honesty, humility, piety, and 
devotion to Allah. 


Although he was blessed with a great deal of divine success 
and guidance, he never stopped weeping and saying, “I wish I were 
ashes dispersed by the wind." 


God-fearing men of this type did not fear Allah because of their 
sins. Sins were rarely committed by them, since the day of their 
conversion to Islam. The more they got acquainted with Allah's 
greatness, majesty, and sublimity, the more they recognized their 
inability to truly thank and worship Allah and the more God-fearing 
they became, no matter how much they prayed, praised Allah or 
submitted themselves to Him. 


Once the Prophet's Companions asked him, "O Prophet of 
Allah, why when we are sitting with you do we feel calmness and 
tenderness in our hearts as an ascetic, seeing the Hereafter as if it 
were before us, but when we leave you to meet our wives, children, 
and our worldly affairs, we deny ourselves?" The Prophet (PBUH) 
responded, "By Allah, if you adhered strictly to your first state, the 
angels would have shaken your hands clearly. So it is natural for 
there to be a worshiping time followed by business.” 


429 


When ‘“Umraan heard this Prophetic saying (hadith), his 
longing desire was moved; therefore, he promised himself never to 
abstain from striving to reach such a great goal, even if it cost him his 
whole life. He was never convinced to live dividing his time one hour 
for leisure and one hour for worship. He wanted instead his life to be 
a long chain of intimate prayer and total devotion towards the Lord 
of the Worlds. 


During the caliphate of ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab, he was sent to 
Basra, to teach its inhabitants jurisprudence. He settled there and 
soon people turned to him to seek his blessing and the guiding light of 
his religiosity. Al-Hasan Al-Basriy and Ibn Siiriin said, "No one of 
the Prophet's Companions who entered Basra can be considered 
better than ~*Umraan Ibn Husain. 


~Umraan refused to occupy himself with anything but worship. 
He spent his whole time doing nothing but adoring Allah until it 
seemed as if he belonged to another world other than the one in which 
he lived among his people and walked on its ground. Yes, it is true. 
He became like an angel living among angels, listening to, talking to, 
and shaking hands with them. 


* * * 


When the great uprising between the parties of ~Aliy and 
Mu*aawiyah took place, he did not just hold a neutral position, but 
appealed to people to abstain from joining the fight, adhering to the 
cause of peace. He went on saying, "I would prefer to be a 
shepherd on top of a mountain till I die rather than shoot an arrow at 
anyone in either party, right or wrong." Any Muslim he met, he 
advised saying, "Keep to your mosque. If it is broken into forcefully, 
then keep indoors. If the doors are broken into forcefully by someone 
who aims at taking your life and wealth, then fight him." 


* * * 


430 


“Umraan Ibn Husain’s faith reached a very high level. For 30 
years he suffered from severe disease. However, he never showed 
any sign of discontent nor did he grumble. Instead he adored and 
worshiped Allah persistently, all through his life. When his visitors 
came to encourage him, he always replied, "The dearest things to my 
heart are those dearest to Allah." 


When he felt that death was approaching, he said to his family 
and kin, "When you finish burying me, slaughter and feed the people.” 


* * * 


Truly, they should slaughter and feed the people. The death of 
someone like ‘Umraan should be considered a great and glorious 
wedding festival, wherein his soul is being wedded to a Paradise as 
wide as earth, heaven prepared for the pious. 


431 


(52) 
SALAMAH IBN AL-AKWA* 
The Infantry Hero 


His son Iyaas summarized all his virtues in just one sentence: 
"My father never lied.” To be described by this singular virtue makes 
a person elligible for a highly elevated position among the pious and 
virtuous. Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa* achieved such a position, one 
which he deserved. Salamah was one of the rare Arab spearmen, but 
he was also famous for his courage, generosity, and charitable deeds. 


He sincerely submitted himself to Islam; then it was Islam that 
molded his personality according to its system. 


Salamah was one of those who attended the Pledge of 
Radwaan. 


In A.H. 6, the Prophet (PBUH) and his Companions aimed at 
visiting the Sacred House in Makkah, but the Quraish hindered them 
from doing so. 


The Prophet (PBUH) sent ~Uthmaan Ibn “Affaan to tell them 
that he came as a visitor, not as a fighter. While they awaited 
‘Uthmaan’s return, a rumor spread that the Quraish had killed him. 
The Prophet (PBUH) sat under a shady tree to take the Companion’s 
oath of allegiance, one by one. They gave him their word to be ready 
to die. 


Salamah reported: I swore the oath of allegiance in front of the 
Prophet to be ready to die. Then I stepped aside. When the crowd 
of people nearly ended, the Prophet (PBUH) said, " O Salamah, 
aren't you going to swear your oath of allegiance?" I said, "I've 
already done that." He said, " Again." I swore the oath again. 


432 


Salamah had redeemed his oath long before that day. He 
redeemed it since the day he admitted that there is no god but Allah 
and Muhammad is His Messenger. He said, "I joined the Prophet 
(PBUH) in seven battles and joined Zaid Ibn Haarithah in nine 
battles." 


He was one of the most skillful warriors as an infantryman and 
one of the best to shoot arrows and throw spears. His tactics were 
similar to present day guerilla warfare : if an enemy approached, he 
retreated waiting for him to move backwards or to take a rest, in 
order to attack him by suprise. In this way he was able to chase alone 
the force led by “Uyainah Ibn Hisn Al-Fizaarii which raided the 
environs of Al-Madiinah in the Dhii Qarad Raid. Totally alone, he 
followed their traces, then continued fighting and pushing them away 
from Al- Madiinah until the Prophet (PBUH) reached him with a 
great number of Companions. On that day the Prophet (PBUH) said 
to the Companions, "Our best infantryman is Salamah Ibn AlI- 
Akwa’. 


Salamah never knew deep sorrow and anxiety except when his 
brother ~Aamir Ibn Al-Akwa* died during the Battle of Al- Khaibar. 


‘Aamir was the one singing in front of the Muslim army: 


Had it not been for You 

We would not have been guided, 

Nor prayed nor given ckarity. 

Bless us with tranquility, 

And let us be strong and firm-hearted 
when meeting our enemies. 


433 


In that battle ~Aamir wanted to strike a polytheist with his 
sword. However, his sword bent and its edge injured him fatally. 
Some Muslims said, "Poor “Aamir, he has been deprived of 
martyrdom.” 


Salamah's anxiety was severe because he thought, like others, 
that his brother, who had killed himself accidently, was deprived of 
the recompense of jihaad and the reward of martyrdom. But soon 
the Prophet (PBUH) put things in their right order when Salamah 
went to him saying. " O Messenger of Allah, is it true that by dying in 
this way ‘Aamir has been deprived of the reward of all his previous 
deeds?" The Messenger (PBUH) answered, “He has been killed asa 
mujaahid. He is to be granted two rewards. He is right now 
swimming in the rivers of Paradise." 


Salamah was very generous. However, he was more so when 
asked to give something for the sake of Allah. If someone had asked 
him to give away his life for the sake of Allah, he would not have 
hesitated to do so. People knew this attitude of his, so when anyone 
needed something, he just asked him for the sake of Allah. He 
always said, "If someone would not give for the sake of Allah, for 
whose sake then would he give?" 


* + * 


On the day of “Uthmaan's murder (May Allah be pleased with 
him) the great mujaahid realized that the gates of sedition had been 
opened. How could it be possible for him who had fought among 
his brethren all his life to turn into a warrior against his brethren? It 
was not his right to use his fighting skill, which had been praised by 
the Prophet (PBUH), against believers and Muslims. 


It was therefore more proper that he carry his belongings and 
leave Al-Madiinah for a place called Ar-Rabzah, the same place to 
which Abu Dhar chose to emigrate and settle. 


434 


Salamah spent the rest of his life at Ar-Rabzah. In A.H. 74 his 
burning desire took him to Al-Madiinah, where he spent one or two 
days as a visitor, and on the third day he died. It was as if the dear, 
moist earth of Al-Madiinah appealed to him to offer his body a cool, 
safe shelter, as it had previously offered all the blessed Companions 
and pious and virtuous marytrs. 


435 


: (53) 
“ABD ALLAH IBN AZ-ZUBAIR 
What a Man! What a Martyr! 


A blessed child in his mother's womb was he, when his mother 
passed over the burning desert sand leaving Makkah for Al-Madiinah 
on her emigration route. While still unborn, “Abd Allah was to 
emigrate with the Muhaajiruun. His mother Asmaa' (May Allah be 
pleased with her) had hardly reached Qubaa’, when she began to 
suffer labor pains. 


‘Abd Allah, the first child to be born after the Hijrah, was 
carried to the Prophet's house in Al-Madiinah. There the Prophet 
(PBUH) kissed him, then chewed a date and rubbed it on the 
newborn's gums (a Sunnah called tainiik). Thus the Prophet's saliva 
was the first thing to enter “Abd Allah's belly. 


Muslims gathered, carried the newborn baby and went round 
with him through the streets of Al Madiinah applauding and shouting 
"Allahu Akbar"( Allah is the Greatest). 


When the Prophet (PBUH) and the Muslims settled in Al- 
Madiinah, the Jews there, bearing deep spite against the Muslims, 
were subdued. They spread the rumor that their priests had made 
the Muslims infertile by means of their witchcraft and Al- Madiinah 
was not going to witness the birth of Muslim babies. When “Abd 
Allah came out from the unseen, he was an irrefutable proof from 
Allah that the Jews’ claims were mere lies and deceptive tricks. 


“Abd Allah did not reach the age of majority during the 
Prophet's lifetime. However, his intimate contact with the Prophet 
(PBUH) during childhood granted him the basic materials of 
manliness and taught him the principles of life, principles which 
would be the subject of people's admiration and talk, as will be 
mentioned later. 


436 


The little child's character developed rapidly. He displayed 
extraordinary energy, intellect, and firmness. His youth was full of 
chasity, purity, worship, and heroism beyond imagination. As days 
went by his manners did not change. He was a man sure of his path, 
walking his way with strong will and firm belief. 


* * * 


He did not exceed the age of 27, during the conquests of Africa, 
Spain, and Constantinople, when he proved to be one of the great 
heroes. That happened, in particular, during the Battle of Ifriigiyah 
(Tunisia) when 20,000 Muslim soldiers confronted an army of 
120,000. 


The battle was in progress and the Muslims encountered a real 
danger. “Abd Allah took a look at the enemy's army and soon 
realized the source of their strength. It was the leader, the Berber 
king, who effectively encouraged his soldiers, pushing them towards 
death. “Abd Allah knew that the battle's outcome depended 
primarily on the death of their stubborn leader. But how was he 
going to reach him? He had first to pass through a great and fiercely 
fighting army. However, ‘Abd Allah's courage and bravery were not 
ever subject to question. He called his companions and said, "Protect 
my back, attack with me.” Like a flying arrow he forced his way 
towards the leader, bursting through fighting warriors. When he 
reached him, he struck him dead. Immediately the leader fell down 
motionless. Then he turned towards those who surrounded their king 
and leader, killing them all. "Allahu Akbar" was then to be heard. 


The Muslims soon saw their standard lifted on the same spot 
where the Berber leader had commanded his soldiers. They 
realized that victory had almost been achieved. They strengthened 
their force and soon everything was over in favor of the Muslims. The 
leader of the Muslim army, ‘Abd Allah Ibn Abi Sarh.was told about 
the great role “Abd Allah Ibn Az-Zubair hadplayed. He rewarded 


437 


him with the honor of personally carrying the news of victory to Al- 
Madiinah and to the Caliph ‘Uthmaan Ibn *Affaan. 


* * * 


Nevertheless, his miraculous and extraordinary heroism in 
fighting came second to his heroism in the sphere of worship. 


His family, his youth, his position and its eminence, his wealth, 
his strength, nothing of that sort could hinder “Abd Allah from being 
an admirable God-fearing worshiper, fasting all day long while 
praying all night. 


‘Umar Ibn ‘Abd Al-‘Aziiz once asked Ibn Abi Mulaikah to 
describe “Abd Allah, so he said, "By Allah, I've never see a soul 
similar to his. When he began his prayer, he left everything behind. 
He bowed down and prostrated for such a long period that birds 
stood on his back considering him a wall or a gown thrown away. 
Once a projectile passed between his beard and chest while praying. 
By Allah, he did not feel it nor was he shaken by it. He did not stop 
his recitation nor hurry his bowing." 


Similar to legends, the truthful information about “Abd Allah's 
worship was transmitted by history. 


His fasting, his prayer, his pilgrimage, his noble soul, his 
continuous fear of Allah, his close relation to Allah, his being a 
devoted worshiper and a fasting fighter throughout his life were all 
in him like interwoven threads. 


Although there was some kind of disagreement between “Abd 
Allah Ibn Az-Zubair and Ibn ~Abbaas, the latter described ~Abd 
Allah in the following words: "He was a reciter of the Qur'aan, a 
follower of the Sunnah, submissive to Allah, a God-fearing faster, son 
of the Prophet's disciple. His mother was As-Siddiiq's daughter, his 


438 


aunt *Aa'ishah the Prophet's wife; his rank can only be ignored by the 
blind.” 


* * * 


The strength of high mountains did not equal ‘Abd Allah's 
firmness and assiduity. Sincere, noble, strong, he was always ready 
to sacrifice his life for his clarity and straightforwardness. 


During his dispute and wars with Bani Umaiyah (the 
Ommiads), Al-Husain Ibn Numair, the leader of the army sent by 
Yaziid to suppress Ibn Az-Zubair's revolt, went to visit ‘Abd Allah 
Ibn Az-Zubair in Makkah after the news reached there that Yaziid 
had died. Al-Husain offered “Abd Allah to go with him to Syria 
where he would use his power to force people to swear the oath of 
allegiance to Ibn Az-Zubair. However, Ibn Az-Zubair refused this 
golden chance because he was totally convinced of the necessity to 
take revenge on the Syrian army for the terrible crimes committed 
while marching on the Prophet's Madiinah to satisfy the Ommiads' 


greed. 


We may differ with “Abd Allah, wishing he would have 
preferred peace and forgiveness by responding to a rare chance 
offered by Al-Husain, Yaziid's leader. Nevertheless, the man's 
position in favor of his conviction and faith, rejecting lies and tricks, 
deserves respect and admiration. 


Al-Hajaaj attacked with his army, beseiging him and his 
followers. At that time, among ‘Abd Allah's warriors was a group of 
very skillful Abyssinian spearmen and warriors. ‘Abd Allah heard 
them talking about the late Caliph ‘Uthmaan (May Allah be pleased 
with him). Their conversation lacked all forms of justice and fairness. 
“Abd Allah reprimanded them severely saying, " By Allah, I don't like 
to defeat my enemy with the help of someone hating *Uthmaan." He 
sent them away at a very critical time in which he needed help so 
desperately, like a drowning man seeking hope. 


439 


His sincerity and honesty in faith and principles made him 
indifferent to the loss of 200 of his most skillful spearmen, the faith 
of whom he could no longer trust. 


All that despite the fierce decisive battle which stood in front of 
him, the outcome of which could have been different if those 
spearmen had remained. 


* * * 


His resistance against Mu*‘aawiyah and Yaziid was an 
extraordinary legend of bravery. He considered Yaziid Ibn 
Mu‘ aawiyah Ibn Abi Sufyaan the most unqualified person to rule the 
Muslim community. That was true. Yaziid was totally corrupt. He 
did not possess one single virtue which would forgive his crimes and 
evils which have been narrated by history. 


How was it possible for Ibn Az-Zubair to swear the oath of 
allegiance to him? He strongly refused to do so while Mu‘aawiyah 
was alive and more so when Yaziid became caliph. Yaziid sent 
someone to threaten him. He, however, said, "I'm not going to swear 
the oath of allegiance to a drunkard.” 


* * * 


Ibn Az-Zubair became Commander of the Faithful with Holy 
Makkah as his capital, extending his rule over Hejaz, Yemen, Basra, 
Kufa, Khurasan, and Syria except Damascus. The inhabitants of all 
these provinces swore the oath of allegiance to him. But the 
Ommiads were not satisfied. Restless, they waged continuous wars, 
most of which ended in their defeat. Nothing changed until “Abd Al- 
Maalik Ibn Marwaan ordered one of the most harsh, criminal, cruel, 
and merciless human beings to attack “Abd Allah in Makkah. This 
was Al-Hajaaj Ath-Thagafiy, who was described by “Umar Ibn Abd 
Al-Aziiz: "If all nations were to weigh together their sins, and we 
came with Al Hajaaj only, the balance would sway to our part.” 


* * * 


440 


Al-Hajaaj personally led his army to invade Makkah, Ibn Az- 
Zubair's capital. He besieged it nearly six months, preventing the 
provision of water and food to force people to abandon “Abd Allah. 
Under the severe pressure of hunger, alarge number of fighters 
surrendered and “Abd Allah found himself almost alone. Although 
chances to save his life and soul were still available, he decided to 
carry out his responsibilities to the very end. He went on fighting 
with legendary courage, although he was 70 years old at that time. 


We will only grasp the full image of that situation if we listen to 
the conversation which took place between ~Abd Allah and his 
mother, the great and noble Asmaa’ Bint Abu Bakr, a short while 
before his death. 


He went to her presenting the whole situation and what seemed 
to be his destiny. 


Asmaa’ told him, " My son, you know yourself better than 
anyone else. If you know that you are adhering to the truth and 
calling to it, then be patient till you die for its sake and don't let the 
boys of Bani Umaiyah reach your neck. But if life in this world has 
been your main concern, then you're a wretched son, destroying 
yourself and those killed on your side." 


“Abd Allah said, " By Allah, mother, I've never sought life in 
this world, nor did I submit myself to it. I've never ruled with 
injustice, treated anyone unfairly, or betrayed anyone.” 


His mother Asmaa' said, "I hope I will receive good consolation 
if you precede me to Paradise or I precede you. May Allah have 
mercy for your long prayers at night, your fasting during hot days and 
your reverent treatment of me and your father. Allah, I've handed 
over my son to Your fate; I will be pleased with Your destiny. Reward 
me for sacrificing my son as You reward thankful and patient 
believers.” 


They embraced each other and exchanged a farewell look. After 
one hour of fierce, unparalleled battle, the martyr received a deadly 
stroke. Al-Hajaaj, cruel, cunning, and deceiving as he was, insisted 
on crucifying the lifeless body. 


* * * 


‘Abd Allah's mother, who was on that day 97 years old, went 
to see her crucified son. Like a high towering mountain, his mother 
stood in front of him when Al-Hajaaj approached with shame and 
humiliation and said, "O Mother, the Commander of the Faithful 
~Abd Al-Maalik Ibn Marwaan has recommended me to treat you 
well. Do you need anything?" 


She shouted, " I'm not your mother. I'm the mother of that one 
crucified on the cross. I don't need you. But I'm going to tell you a 
hadiith which I heard from the Prophet (PBUH). He said, 'He will 
emerge from Thagiif, a liar and a vicious one.’ We have already seen 
the liar and the vicious one. I don't think he's anyone else but you." 


“Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar approached to console her and asked 
Allah to grant her patience. She replied, "What hinders me from 
being patient? Wasn't the head of Yahyaa (John) Ibn Zakariyaa 
granted to an Israelite harlot?" 


How great she was, daughter of As-Siddiiq! Are there more 
eloquent words to be directed at those who cut “Abd Allah's head 
off his body before crucifying him? 


If *Abd Allah's head had been handed over as a present to Al- 
Hajaaj and “Abd Al-Maalik, the head of a great Prophet (PBUH), 
Yahyaa Ibn Zakariya had been granted to Salome, a miserable 
Israelite harlot. What a magnificent comparison! What truthful 
words! 


442 


Having suckled the milk of such an extraordinary mother, could 
“Abd Allah possibly have lived a different life, a life not reaching 
such great levels of success, virtue, and heroism? 


May peace be upon “Abd Allah. 

May peace be upon Asmaa’. 

May peace be upon them among the eternally living martyrs. 
May peace be upon them among the most reverent and pious. 


443 


(54) 
‘ABD ALLAH IBN “ABBAAS 
The Scholar of This Nation! 


Ibn ‘Abbaas was similar to Ibn Az-Zubair in that both 
experienced the Prophetic era while still children. The Prophet 
(PBUH) died before Ibn ~Abbaas had reached manhood. He had 
also been granted, while still very young, all the basic materials of 
manliness and the principles of life by the Prophet (PBUH), who 
liked him most, praised him, and taught him pure wisdom. 


Due to his firm belief, gentleness, good character, and the 
richness of his knowledge, he was able to occupy a very high rank 
among the men around the Prophet (PBUH). 


* + * 


He was the son of Al--Abbaas Ibn ‘Abd Al-Muttalib Ibn 
Haashim, the Prophet's uncle. His epithet was "The Nation's 
Scholar". He deserved the title and position due to his vast 
knowledge, the enlightenment of his mind, and his versatility. 


Ibn ~Abbaas came to knowledge at a very early age, a 
knowledge which increased as days went by. That is because the 
Prophet (PBUH) was always drawing “Abd Allah close to him, 
patting his shoulders and asking Allah, "O Allah, bless him with the 
full knowledge of the religion and interpretation of the Holy Qur'aan." 


The Prophet (PBUH) repeated the same prayer for his cousin 
‘Abd Allah in various situations. In this way “Abd Allah Ibn 
*Abbaas realized that he had been created to acquire knowledge, 
and his intellectual capabilities inclined strongly in that direction. 


Although his age did not exceed 13 when the Prophet (PBUH) 
died, he had not spent his childhood in vain. He had attended the 
Prophet's assemblies and learned his words by heart. 


444 


When the Prophet (PBUH) died, he was eager to learn from the 
Companions what he had failed to hear or learn from the Prophet 
(PBUH) himself. 


He turned into a continuous question mark. Whenever he heard 
that someone had acquired wisdom or learned a hadiith by heart, he 
hurried to learn it from him. His bright ambitious mind forced him to 
examine all that came to his ears. 


He was not just concerned with gathering information, but with 
examining it and its sources. He once said about himself, "If I 
wanted to know something about an issue I would ask 30 
Companions." 


He drew a picture demonstrating his concern to reach truth and 
knowledge: When the Prophet (PBUH) died, I said to one of the 
Ansaar youth, "Let's go to the Prophet's Companions to ask them, as 
they are still numerous.” He said, "O Ibn ‘Abbaas, how strange you 
really are! Do you think that people are in need of you while the 
great Companions are still among them?" The young man dropped 
the matter, whereas I turned to ask the Prophet's Companions. 
Whenever I was informed that someone had related a hadiith, I 
would go to him in the afternoon while he was napping. I put my 
gown as a pillow under my head in front of his door. The wind 
scattered the dust over me. When he finished his nap and came out 
and saw me, he said, "O Prophet's cousin, what is it that brought 
you here? Why didn't you send for me ?" Then I would say, " No, it's 
you who deserves to be visited." Then I would ask him about the 
hadiith and learn from him. 


In this way our young man went on asking and asking and 
asking, then examining the answers and discussing them with a 
curious mind. 


Every day his wisdom and knowledge developed until he 
achieved, while still a youth, the wisdom, patience, and eloquency of 


445 


the elderly, so much so that the Commander of the Faithful “Umar 
(May Allah be pleased with him) was eager to consult with him in 
every great issue. He called him, "The young leader of the elderly". 
Ibn *Abbaas was once asked, “How could you acquire all that 
knowledge?" He answered, "By means of a questioning tongue and a 
reasoning mind." Through his continuously inquiring tongue, his ever- 
detecting mind, and, moreover, his humility and gentleness, Ibn 
‘Abbaas was to become the nation's scholar. 


Sa‘d Ibn Abi Waqqaas described him in the following words: 
I've never seen one with such presence of mind nor more intellectual 
and milder than Ibn *Abbaas. I've seen ‘Umar (May Allah be pleased 
with him), although surrounded by those who attended Badr, 
inviting him to discuss difficult problems. Whenever Ibn “Abbaas 
spoke out his viewpoint,Umar always stuck to it. 


‘Ubaid Allah Ibn “Utbah once said: I've never seen anyone more 
knowledgeable in the Prophet's hadiith than Ibn “Abbaas. Neither did 
I see anyone more knowledgeable during Abu Bakr, ‘Umar or 
‘Uthmaan’s caliphates than him; or more accurate in what he says in 
terms of jurisprudence or more knowledgeable in terms of poems, the 
Arabic language, Qur'aanic interpretation or religious matters. He 
divided his time, each day teaching one subject or another, 
jurisprudence, Qur'aanic interpretation, invasions, poems, and 
history, each one a different day. I've never seen a scholar listening 
to him without submitting himself completely to him, nor asking 
without being impressed by his vast and rich knowledge. 


+ * * 


Ibn *Abbaas, who was appointed governor of Basra during the 
caliphate of ~Aliy Ibn Abi Taalib (May Allah be pleased with him) 
was once described by a Muslim in the following words: He stuck to 
three matters, and gave up three. He dazzled men's hearts whenever 
he talked. He was a good listener whenever he was spoken to. He 
chose the easiest of two matters whenever he was opposed. He gave 


446 


up hypocrisy. He gave up the companionship of wicked people. He 
gave up all that is excusable. 


* * + 


His diverse culture and vast, comprehensive knowledge were 
admirable. He was the skillful, shrewd authority in every field of 
knowledge: Qur'aanic interpretation, jurisprudence, history, Arabic 
language and literature. Therefore, he was a recourse for the seeker 
after truth. People traveled to him in groups from all parts of the 
Islamic world in order to listen to him and to learn from him. 


A Companion who was contemporary with him narrated: I've 
seen one of Ibn ‘Abbaas's scholastic assemblies. If the whole tribe of 
the Quraish would have been proud, it would have been enough for 
their pride. I've seen people gathering in front of his door until the 
whole path had become so crowded that no one could enter or exit. 


I entered, informing him that a great number of people were 
sitting in front of his door. He asked me to prepare his water for 
ablution, which he performed, then sat down and said, "Go out to 
them and invite those interested in Qur'aanic interpretation." 


I went out and let them in. They entered, filling the house. 
They didn't ask about anything without being answered in a 
satisfactory manner. Then he said to them, " Don't forget your 
brethren." They went out to allow others to enter. Then he said, "Go 
out and invite those interested in jurisprudence." 


I went out and let them in. They entered, filling the house. They 
didn't ask about anything without being satisfactorily answered. 
Then he said, "Don’t forget your brethren." They went out to allow 
others to enter. Then he said, "Go out and invite those interested in 
religious duties." 


I went out and let them in. They entered, filling the house. They 
didn’t ask about anything without being satisfactorily answered. 


447 


Then he said, "Don't forget your brethren." They went out to allow 
others to enter. 


Then he said, "Go out and invite those interested in the Arabic 
language and literature." I went out and let them in. They entered, 
filling the house. They didn't ask about anything without being 
satisfactorily answered. 


* * * 


Ibn *Abbaas had not only a sharp memory but an extraordinary 
one, and extreme brilliance and intelligence. His arguments were as 
clear, bright, and cheerful as sunlight. He would not let his opponent 
leave until he was not only convinced but, in addition, completely 
satisfied and pleased with the magnificence of his logic and brilliance 
of his speech. 


In spite of his rich knowledge and effective argument, he never 
considered his discussion and conversation a battle of intellects in 
which he could be proud of his vast knowledge and victory over his 
opponents. On the contrary he considered it a straightforward path 
to visualize and realize truth. 


For a long time his fair and sharp logic had been a source of 
alarm to the Khawaarij. Once Imam “Aliy (May Allah be pleased 
with him) sent him to a large group of the Khawaarij. They had a 
wonderful discussion, in which he was in control of the talk, arguing 
in a very admirable way. The following is an extract of that long 
conversation: 


Ibn *Abbaas asked them, "What do you have against ~ Aliy?" 
They said, "We are discontent with three matters. First, he let 
men judge in Allah's religion, whereas Allah said, <.. . surely 


judging is only for GOD > (6:57). 


"Second, he is a murderer. However, he didn't take any captives 
or war booty. If they had been disbelievers, then their wealth would 


448 


have been permissible, and if they had been Muslims, then their 
murder would have been prohibited. 


"Third, during the arbitration, he agreed to give up the title 
‘Commander of the Faithful’ in response to his enemies. If he isn't 
Commander of the Faithful, then he must be Commander of the 
Disbelievers." 


Ibn “Abbaas began to refute their claims. "As for letting men 
judge in Allah's religion, what's wrong with that? Allah said, < O you 
who believe! Do not kill animals of the hunt while you are on the 
Pilgrimage, and whoever of you kills it intentionally, he shall make 
recompense the equal of what he has killed from the cattle, which 
shall be judged by two just men among you > (5:95). Tellme, by 
Allah, is letting men judge in sparing the Muslim blood not worthier 
than letting them judge in the case of compensating a killed rabbit 
that is worth a quarter of a dirham?" 


Their leaders stammered in speech under the pressure of that 
sarcastic but decisive logic. Then he continued his talk. "As for your 
claim that he is a murderer who didn't take prisoners or war booty, 
did you expect him to take ‘Aa'ishah, the Prophet's wife and Mother 
of the Faithful, a prisoner and her belongings as booty?” At that 
moment their faces went blank out of shame and they tried to cover 
them with their hands. 


Ibn “Abbaas went on to the third claim. "As for your claim that 
he agreed to give up the title ‘Commander of the Faithful’ to give 
arbitration a chance, let me tell you what the Prophet (PBUH) did on 
the Day of Hudaibiyah. While he was dictating the agreement 
between him and the Quraish, he said to the scribe, ‘Write, This is 
what the Messenger of Allah agreed upon.’ The representative of the 
Quraish said, 'By Allah, if we believed that you were the Messenger 
of Allah, we wouldn't have hindered you from entering the Sacred 
House or fought against you.' The Prophet (PBUH) then said, "Then 
write, This is what Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd Allah has agreed upon. By 
Allah, I'm the Messenger of Allah even if you deny that. Write 
whatever you like.'" 


449 


The discussion between Ibn ~Abbaas and the Khawaarij went 
on in such a miraculous, magnificent way. The discussion had hardly 
ended when some 20,000 of the Khawaarij announced their 
conviction in what was said and announced the end of their 
oppositon to “Aliy's imamate. 


* * * 


Ibn *Abbaas not only possessed a great fortune of knowledge 
but also a greater fortune of manners of knowledge and the 
knowledgeable. He was a great figure in his generosity. He spent his 
wealth abundantly for the people's sake with the same willingness 
with which he shared his knowledge. His contemporaries said, " 
We've never seen a house more filled with food, drinks, fruits, and 
knowledge than Ibn *Abbaas's house." 


He possessed a pure soul that never carried any spite. He 
never tired of wishing all the good for people, those whom he knew 
and: those whom he did not. He said about himself, "Whenever | 
recited a verse, I wished that all people had acquired the knowledge 
I've acquired. Whenever I heard about a just ruler ruling fairly, I was 
filled with delight and prayed for him, although I did not need him. 
Whenever | heard about rain falling on Muslim land, I was filled with 
delight although I did not own any livestock grazing on that land." 


He was a devoted repenting worshiper, praying at night and 
often fasting. No one could miss the stream of tears on his cheek. 
That is because he cried so much whenever he prayed or recited the 
Qur'aan. Whenever he read a scolding or threatening verse, or the 
mention of death and resurrection, his wail and laments grew louder 
and louder. 


In addition, he was honest, brave, and eloquent. He had his 
own viewpoint and opinions about the dispute between Imam “Aliy 
and Mu‘aawiyah, which proved his capacity for stratagem. 


450 


He preferred peace to war, kindness to violence, logic to 
compulsion. 


When Al-Hussain (May Allah be pleased with him) intended to 
go to Iraq to fight Ziyaad and Yaziid, Ibn ‘Abbaas did everything 
he could to prevent him. Afterwards, he was informed about his 
martyrdom. He felt deep grief and kept indoors. 


Whenever a dispute between two Muslims arose, he could 
always be seen carrying the banner of peace, forgiveness, and 
tenderness. 


It is true that he himself was involved in the battle between 
“Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah when he fought on “Aliy’s side. But he did 
that because, at the beginning, the war represented a necessary 
eradication of a movement which was causing a terrible split within 
the Islamic community, threatening the unity of the faith and of the 
believers. 


* * * 


As long as he lived he filled the whole world with knowledge 
and wisdom, spreading among people his scent of piety. 


When he reached the age of 71, he was invited to meet Allah. 
The city of At-Taa'if witnessed a great scene for a believer who had 
been promised Paradise. While his body settled safely in its grave, 
the horizon was shaken by the echo of the truthful divine promise: 
<”O soul at peace. Return to your Lord, well pleased and well 
pleasing. Enter you among My servants. And enter into My 
Paradise!” > (89:27-30). 


451 


(55) 
*ABBAAD IBN BISHR 
With Him Was the Light of Allah! 


When Mus‘ab Ibn ‘Umair went to Al-Madiinah, appointed by 
the Messenger of Allah (PBUH) to teach the Ansaar — who had given 
their oath of allegiance to the Messenger in Islam — and to lead them 
in prayer, “Abbaad Ibn Bishr was one of the devoted whose hearts 
Allah opened to good. So Mus*ab approached the assembly, and 
~Abbaad listened to him and stretched out his right hand to give his 
oath of allegiance to Islam. From that day on, he took his place 
among the Angaar with whom Allah is pleased and they with Him. 


The Prophet (PBUH) emigrated to Al-Madiinah after the 
believers of Makkah had preceded him there. Then began the military 
campaigns in which the forces of good and light clashed with the 
forces of darkness and evil. In each of these battles, “Abbaad Ibn 
Bishr was in the front ranks fighting heroically in the cause of Allah, 
completely consumedand dedicated with heart and soul in a 
dazzling, overwhelming way. Perhaps the event which we now 
narrate will disclose something of the heroism of this great believer. 


After the Messenger of Allah and the believers had finished the 
military campaign of Dhaat-Ar-Riqaa’, they stopped over at a place 
to spend the night and the Messenger chose guards from the 
Companions to take turns. Among them were ~“Ammaar Ibn Yaasir 
and *Abbaad Ibn Bishr on one watch. 


*Abbaad saw that his companion ~Ammaar was exhausted, so 
he demanded that he sleep the first part of the night and he would 
stand guard so his companion could take some rest. He could resume 
guard after he awoke. 


*Abbaad saw that the place around him was safe, so he 
thought, why not fill up his time with prayer, so that he would be 
rewarded both for praying and standing guard. So he stood praying. 


452 


While he was standing reciting a surah from the Qur'aan after 
Al-Faatihah, an arrow passed through his shoulder, so he pulled it 
out and continued his prayer. Then the attacker shot a second arrow 
in the darkness of the night, so he pulled it out, also, and completed 
his recitation. Then he bowed and prostrated. Weakness and pain 
had dissipated his strength, so he extended his right hand, while 
prostrating, to his companion sleeping near him and continued to 
shake him until he woke up. Then he sat up from his prostration and 
recited the Tashahhud (i.e. the last part of his prayer) and completed 
his prayer. 


*Ammaar awoke at the weary, trembling voice of his words, 
"Stand guard in my place. I am wounded!" ~Ammaar jumped up 
yelling noisily and quickly frightened away the attackers, so they ran 
away. Then he turned to ‘Abbaad and said to him, "Glory be to 
Allah! Why didn't you awaken me when you were first hit?" 


“Abbaad replied, "In my prayer I was reciting verses from the 
Qur'aan that filled my soul with such awe that I didn't want to 
interrupt it nor cut it short. By Allah, I swear, because I did not want 
to lose a single word which the Messenger of Allah ordered me to 
preserve, I would have preferred death more than interrupting those 
verses which I was reciting.” 


“Abbaad was extremely devoted and strong in his love of 
Allah, His Messenger, and His religion, and this devotion lasted 
throughout his life. 


Since he heard the Prophet (PBUH) saying to the Ansaar, 
"You are my people. You are the people who protect. There is no 
nation which has come like you before." ... We say, since ~Abbaad 
heard these words from his Prophet (PBUH), teacher, and guide to 
Allah, he spent generously of his wealth and gave his spirit and life in 
the way of Allah and His Messenger. In the areas of sacrifice and 
even death, he constantly put them first, and even in a seizure of 
booty and spoils of war. In places of hardship and struggle, his 
companions searched for him until they found him. 


453 


He was always a worshiper — worship completely absorbed 
him; brave — bravery and heroism engrossed him; generous — 
generosity engaged him. 


He was a strong believer. He pledged his life to the cause of 
faith. All of this was known of him by the Companions of the 
Messenger. The Mother of the Faithful *Aa'ishah (May Allah be 
pleased with her) said: "There are three from among the Ansaar who 
are not surpassed in virtue by anyone: Sad Tbn Mu‘aadh, Usaid Ibn 
Hudair and *Abbaad Ibn Bishr." 


* * * 


The first Muslims knew *Abbaad as a man in whom was light 
from Allah. His radiant, clear vision guided to areas of goodness and 
certainty without searching or difficulty. 


His brothers believed in his light to the extent that they 
attributed to him the picture of perception and discipline. They 
agreed that once ~Abbaad was walking in the darkness and there 
emanated from him a light that lit the way for him. 


In the apostasy wars after the death of the Messenger (PBUH), 
~Abbaad carried his responsibility with incomparable death-defying 
courage. 


On the battlefield of Al-Yamaamah, where the Muslims faced 
the most cruel and skillful army under the leadership of Musailamah, 
the Liar, ~Abbaad perceived a danger threatening to Islam. His 
willingness to sacrifice and his vigor constituted sufficient 
importance, such that it gave him his faith and raised him to the level 
of his aspiration and ability to perceive danger, making him one 
willing to sacrifice and give up everything for his faith, not desiring 
anything other than death and martyrdom. 


A day before the beginning of the Battle of Al-Yamaamah he 
saw in his sleep a vision that did not remain long enough to be clear: 


454 


above the land of the great destructive battle which the Muslims went 
through. .. 


So let an honorable companion, Abu Sa*iid Al-Khudriy, tell us 
the story of the vision which *Abbaad saw, his explanation of it, and 
his amazing attitude in fighting which ended in martyrdom. 


Abu Sa*iid reported: ~Abbaad Ibn Bishr said to me, "O Abu 
Sa*iid, I saw last night as if the sky had opened up for me. Then it 
closed and covered over me. Indeed, I see it, if Allah wills, to mean 
martyrdom." I said to him, Good. I swear by Allah, you did indeed 
see it." On the Day of Al-Yamaamah, I looked at him and indeed 
saw him shouting to the Ansaar, "Use your swords forcefully and be 
distinguished among the people!" So 400 men came quickly to him, 
all of them from among the Angaar people, until they stopped at the 
gate of the garden. They fought violently, and *Abbaad Ibn Bishr was 
martyred. I saw on his face much beating and I did not know him 
except by a mark that was on his body. 


Thus was “Abbaad raised to the level of his duties as a believer 
from among the Angaar. He gave the oath of allegiance to his 
Messenger, dedicating his life to Allah and death in His cause. 


When he saw the destructive battle turning in favor of the 
enemy, he remembered the words of the Messenger to his people, the 
Ansaar: "You are my people. I can not be defeated through you. 
There has not come and people like you before." This sound filled his 
heart and soul and penetrated his consciousness, until it was as if the 
Messenger of Allah was now standing before him repeating these 
words of his. 


“Abbaad felt that the whole responsibility of the battle was 
placed completely on the shoulders of the Angaar, on the shoulders 
of those about whom the Messenger of Allah had said, "There has not 
come any people like you before." And on the shoulders of no one 
else besides them. 


455 


Then and there, “Abbaad went up on a hill and shouted, " O 
people of the Angaar! Carry your sword in a valiant way, and be 
honored and distinguished among the people!" 


When 400 of them answered his call, he led them and Abu 
Dajaanah and Al-Baraa' Ibn Maalik to the garden of death, where the 
army of Musailamah had fortified itself for protection. The hero 
fought a worthy fight as a man, as a believer, and as an Angaar. 


On that glorious day, ~“Abbaad attained martyrdom. The vision 
which he saw in his dream the day before came true. Did he not see 
the sky open until, when he entered it from that opening, it returned 
and folded on him and closed? 


He interpreted it as meaning that his spirit would ascend in the 
coming battle to its Creator. The vision was true and the 
interpretation of it was true. And the doors of heaven were opened to 


welcome to happiness the spirit of “Abbaad Ibn Bishr, the man who 
had with him a light from Allah. 


(56) 
SUHAIL IBN ‘AMR 
From Liberation to Martyrdom 


When he was captured into the hands of the Muslims in the 
Battle of Badr, “Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab approached the Messenger 
of Allah (PBUH) and said, "O Messenger of Allah, let me extract the 
teeth of Suhail Ibn “Amr until no speaker stands against you after 
today." 


The great Messenger responded, "No, ‘Umar. I do not treat 
anyone harshly so Allah will not harm me, even though I am a 
Prophet." Then ‘Umar came nearer to him and the Prophet said, 
"Perhaps Suhail will take a stand tomorrow that will make you 


happy." 


So the prophecy of the Messenger came true. The greatest 
orator of the Quraish, Suhail Ibn ~Amr, changed into a brillant and 
dazzling speaker of Islam. This polytheist who was always against 
Islam changed into an obedient believer. His eyes never stopped 
crying out of fear of Allah. One of the senior chiefs of the Quraish 
and a leader of its army changed into a very hard fighter in the path 
of Islam, a fighter who vowed to himself to be persistent and to 
persevere in courage, self-control, and fighting until he died on that 
path, so that perhaps Allah would forgive his previous sins. 


So who was that obstinate polytheist ? He was Suhail Ibn 
“Amr, one of the prominent leaders of the Quraish, and one of its 
wise men and people of intelligence and discernment. 


He was the one whom the Quraish appointed to convince the 
Messenger to change his mind and refrain from entering Makkah 
in the year of Hudaibiyah. At the end of A.H. 6, the Messenger and 
his Companions went out to Makkah to visit the Sacred House and 
to perform “Umrah. They did not want war and they were not 
prepared to fight. 


457 


The Quraish knew they were on their way to Makkah, so they 
went out to block the way and stop them from achieving their 
objective. The situation became critical and hearts became tense. The 
Messenger said to his Companions, "The Quraish do not call me 
today to a plan but ask me instead about the bonds of kinship. So I 
gave them to them." 


The Quraish began to send their messengers and representatives 
to the Prophet, so he informed all of them that he did not come to 
fight but to visit the Sacred House and glorify its sacredness. Each 
time one of their representatives returned, they sent another after him 
more vigorous and unyielding and stronger in persuasion, until they 
chose “Urwah Ibn Mas*‘uud Ath-Thagafiy. He was among the 
strongest and cleverest of them. The Quraish thought that ~“Urwah 
would be able to convince the Messenger to go back; however, he 
quickly came back to them saying, "O people of Quraish, indeed I 
went to the Persian emperor in his kingdom and Caesar in his 
kingdom and the Negus in his kingdom, but, by Allah, I swear I never 
saw a king whose people magnify him as the Companions of 
Muhammad magnify him. I saw around him a people that shall never 
surrender to evil. So, what will you do and what is your opinion?" 


At that time the Quraish believed that there was no way for 
their attempts to succeed, so they decided to resort to negotiation 
and reconciliation. They chose for this task the most suitable of their 
chiefs. He was Suhail Ibn “Amr. 


* * * 


The Muslims saw Suhail coming towards them and recognized 
him and realized that the Quraish preferred the way of peace making 
and mutual understanding when at last they sent Suhail. Suhail sat 
in front of the Messenger, and a long dialogue took place ending with 
a peace treaty. Suhail attempted to gain much for the Quraish. The 
tolerant leniency, noble-mindedness, and excellent manner in which 
the Messenger managed the negotiations and peace making helped 
him in achieving that. 


458 


Days passed until A.H. 8 came. The Messenger and the 
Muslims went out for the conquest of Makkah after the Quraish had 


violated its treaty with the Messenger of Allah. 


The Muhaajiruun returned to their homes which earlier they had 
been expelled from by force. They returned and with them the 
Ansaar, who had taken care of them in their city and preferred them 
over themselves. 


With its flags fluttering victoriously in the sky, Makkah opened 
all of its gates and the polytheists were stopped in bewilderment. 
What would be their destiny and fate today, since they were the 
ones who had done wrong to the Muslims previously by killing them, 
burning them, torturing them, and starving them? The merciful 
Prophet (PBUH) did not want to leave them for long under the 
pressure of these debilitating feelings. He received them and turned to 
them in a good and noble manner and said to them with his merciful 
voice flowing tenderly and lovingly, "O people of Quraish, what do 
you think I will do with you?" 


At that time the enemy of Islam in the past, Suhail Ibn ~Amr, 
stepped forward and answered, "We think you will treat us well, O 
noble brother and son of a noble brother." 


A smile formed from light appeared on the lips of the Beloved 
of Allah and he called to them, "Go, you are free, liberated.” These 
words did not come from the victorious, triumphant Messenger 
except to change human beings with living feelings by melting them to 
obedience, humility, and repentance. At the same moment, this 
situation, filled with nobility and glory, stimulated all of Suhail Ibn 
“Amr's feelings, so he surrendered to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. 
His Islam, at that time, was not the surrender of a defeated man, 
resigned to fate. It was, as his future shall reveal in what follows, the 
surrender of a man overwhelmed and fascinated by the majesty of 
Muhammad and the grandeur of the religion that Muhammad 
demonstrated in his conduct in conformity with its teachings and 
instructions. These teachings, as he saw them, conveyed 
extraordinary benevolence, friendship, and devotion. 


459 


Those who announced their Islam on the Day of the Conquest 
of Makkah were designated with the name "At-Tulaqaa™ or those 
who were transferred by the forgiveness of the Prophet from 
polytheism to Islam when he said to them, "Go, you are free." 


Consequently, some persons from among those Tulaqaa’ (or 
those who were liberated) were raised by their sincerity to a far 
distant horizon of sacrifice, worship, and purity which placed them 
in the first rank of the Prophet's righteous and devoted Companions. 
Among these was Suhail Ibn ~Amr. 


Islam molded and fashioned him afresh and refined all of his 
original skills and gifts and, what is more, increased them and placed 
all of them at the service of truth, goodness, and faith. They 
described him in these words: "The kind, generous, outstanding one. 
The one who performs prayer much and fasts and gives in charity 
and reads the Qur'aan and crys out of fear of Allah." 


That was the greatness of Suhail. For in spite of the fact that he 
accepted Islam on the Day of the Conquest of Makkah, and not 
before that, we see him truthfully affirming his Islam and its certainty, 
to the extent that he excelled in it with distinction, exerting himself 
with all his heart. He was transformed into a worshiper, self-denying 
and abstenious, and into one who sacrifices and strives in the path of 
Allah and Islam. 


When the Messenger was transported to the company of the 
Most High, the news soon reached Makkah. Suhail at that time was 
residing there, and the Muslims were overwhelmed by agitation and 
perplexity, just as the Muslims were in Al-Madiinah. However, the 
confusion of Al-Madiinah was dissipated by Abu Bakr at that time 
by his decisive words: "Whoever worships Muhammad, know that 
Muhammad is dead; and whoever worships Allah, indeed Allah is 
living and never dies." 


So we were amazed when we saw Suhail holding the same 
position in Makkah as Abu Bakr in Al-Madiinah. He gathered all of 


460 


the Muslims there, and he stood dazzling them with his salutorious 
words, informing them that Muhammad was truly the Messenger of 
Allah and that he did not die until he had executed his trust and 
conveyed the message and that the duty of the believers towards this 
message was to assiduously devote all their efforts to it in persuance 
of his methodology and approach. 


On account of Suhail's position and his rightly directly words 
and strong faith, he warded off the discord and civil strife which 
almost extirpated and uprooted the faith of the people of Makkah 
when the news of the death of the Messenger reached them. 


Did not he, the Messenger, say to ‘Umar on the day “Umar 
asked the Prophet (PBUH) for permission to pull out the two teeth of 
Suhail when he was taken prisoner at Badr, “Leave them, 
perhaps they will make you happy one day." 


So on the day when the news of the position of Suhail in 
Makkah and his dazzling speech which made the faith firm in the 
Muslims’ hearts reached the Muslims in Al-Madiinah, “Umar Ibn AI- 
Khattaab remembered the prophecy of his Messenger and laughed a 
long time, for the day had come in which Islam benefited from the 
two teeth of Suhail which “Umar had wanted to crush and tear out. 


When Suhail accepted Islam on the Day of the Conquest of 
Makkah and after he had tasted the sweetness of faith, he imposed 
on himself a vow he summed up in these words: By Allah, I do not 
leave situations and battles with the polytheists except I support the 
Muslims equally and no wealth I spent with the polythcists but I 
spend an equal amount with the Muslims. Perhaps my support of 
the Muslims will be followed by an ever greater support. i stood a 
long time with the polytheists in front of their idols, so let us now 
stand for a long time with the believers in the presence of Allah, the 
One and Only. 


Thus, he started praying and praying and fasting and praying. 
He would not let achance pass him by which would sharpen his 


461 


spirit and make him close to his Lord Most High but that he took 
from it a sufficient portion. 


Thus in his past he stood with the polytheists in situations of 
oppression and war against Islam. So, now let him take his place in 
the Muslim army, fighting bravely to extinguish, with the battalion of 
truth, the fire of the Persian king who used to worship idols and false 
gods other than Allah, and fighting to burn the destinies of the 
peoples who participated in this false worship. So, let him fight 
also to destroy with the battalion of truth the darkness of Rome 
and its injustice and spread the word of monotheism and the fear of 
Allah to every place. 


Thus, he went out with the Muslim army to Syria participating 
in its wars. On the Day of Yarmuuk, the Muslims courageously 
plunged into battle, encountering harm, violence, and danger. Suhail 
Ibn “Amr was almost flying out of joy when he found on this crucial 
day the rich opportunity to make the effort, from his soul, to 
annihilate the sins and mistakes of jaahiliyah before accepting Islam. 


He used to love his house in Makkah greatly, so much so that it 
made him forget himself. Nevertheless, he refused to return to it after 
the Muslim victory over Syria, and so he said, "I heard the Messenger 
of Allah saying, 'The rank and position of one of you who spends one 
hour in the cause of Allah is better for him than his work throughout 
his life.’ Therefore, I will strive in the path of Allah until death, and I 
shall not return to Makkah." 


And Suhail died true to his vow and continued to strive for the 
remainder of his life committed to his religion until the appointed 
time of his demise. So his soul flew quickly to the Mercy of Allah and 
His pleasure. 


462 


(57) 
ABU MUUSAA AL-ASH-ARIY 
Sincerity and Let Be What Will Be 


When the Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab 
sent him to Basra to become its commander and governor, he 
gathered its inhabitants and spoke to them saying, "Indeed the 
Commander of the Faithful “Umar sent me to you to instruct you in 
the Book of your Lord and the traditions of your Prophet and to 
purify your ways for you." 


The people were overcome with astonishment and surprise at 
what he said when they came to understand that one of the 
incumbent duties of the commander and governor was to show them 
how to become people of culture and education and to give them 
understanding of their religion. Also among his obligations was the 
purifying of their ways, and that was something new for them — one 
could even say exciting and remarkable. 


So, who was this ruler about whom such good is said: "No 
horseman ever came to Basra who was better for its people than 
him"? Indeed, he was “Abd Allah Ibn Qais, nicknamed Abu Muusaa 
Al-Ash‘ariy. 


He departed his country and homeland of Yemen for Makkah 
immediately upon hearing of the appearance of a Messenger there 
who was calling to monotheism and inviting to Allah with clear vision 
and ordering noble morals. In Makkah, he sat in the presence of the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) and received from him guidance and 
certainty. He then returned to his country carrying the word of Allah. 
Afterwards, he returned to the Messenger (PBUH) immediately after 
the victory over Khaibar. His arrival coincided with the arrival of 
Ja*far Ibn Abi Taalib, returning with his companions from Abyssinia, 
so the Messenger gave all of them a share of the booty. 


463 


On this occasion, Abu Muusaa did not come alone, but with 
approximately 50 men from the people of Yemen, including his two 
brothers Abu Ruhm and Abu Burdah, to whom the Messenger 
(PBUH) taught Islam. ; 


The Messenger (PBUH) named this delegation and its people 
the Ash‘ariyiin. The Messenger (PBUH) described them as the 
people with the most delicate feelings and kind, gentle hearts. That 
which is most often mentioned about them as the highest example of 
his Companions is as follows: "If they exhausted their food in a 
military campaign or their food became diminished, they would 
gather what they possessed in one garment and divide it among 
themselves equally. So they are from me and I from them." 


+ + + 


From that day, Abu Muusaa took his permanent and high place 
among the Muslims and believers who were destined to be the 
Companions of the Messenger of Allah and his pupils, and to become 
the carriers of Islam to the world in every age and time. 


+ * * 


Abu Muusaa was a wonderful combination of extraordinary 
attributes. He was a bold and daring fighter, a firm combatant when 
he was forced to fight, while at the same time he was peaceful, good, 
and gentle to the most extreme degree of goodness and kindness. He 
was a scholar who possessed comprehension, sound judgment, and 
judicious discrimination. He was intelligent, and his understanding 
excelled in the most complicated, abstruse and obscure issues which 
radiated in legal decisions and judgments, until it was said of him, 
"The judges of this nation are four: “Umar, ~Aliy, Abu Muusaa and 
Zaid Ibn Thaabit." 


In addition to that, he possessed an innocent nature. Whoever 
attempted to deceive him in matters of Allah was himself deceived. 
He possessed great loyalty and responsibility and great trust of the 


464 


people. If we wanted to choose a fact of his life as a slogan, it would 
be this expression: "Sincerity, and let be what will be." 


In the sphere of jihaad, Al-Ash‘ariy carried his responsibility in 
such a glorious and heroic manner that it made the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) call him, " Master of horsemen, Abu Muusaa." He 
shows us a picture of his life as a fighter when he says, "We went out 
with the Messenger of Allah on a military campaign and our feet were 
full of holes and my feet were also full of holes until I lost my toe 
nails and we wrapped our feet with rags." 


His goodness and the peace of his real conviction and inner- 
most thoughts were not provoked by an enemy in battle. He was in 
such a posture that he saw matters in complete clarity and he 
decided them with decisive willpower and determination. It 
happened that while the Muslims were conquering the kingdom of 
Persia, Al-Ash‘ariy came down with his army upon the people of 
Isfahan, who agreed to pay him the jizyah so he made a peace 
settlement with them. 


However, it seems that they were not truthful in their 
agreement. They only wanted to make themselves ready for the 
opportunity to prepare a treacherous attack. Nevertheless, in the 
time of need the cleverness of Abu Muusaa was not oblivious to their 
secret plan. He perceived and saw through their scheme and the evil 
plans they were contriving, so when they began their attack the leader 
was not taken by surprise. Therefore, the war overwhelmed them, 
and the first half of the day was not over before he gained a decisive 
victory. 


In the battles in which the Muslims engaged against Imperial 
Persia, the performance of Abu Muusaa (May Allah be pleased with 
him) was outstanding, and his fighting for the cause of Allah was 
noble. 


In the Battle of Tustar particularly, in which Hurmuzan 
withdrew with his army to fortify his position and gathered massive 


armies, Abu Muusaa was the hero. On that day, the Commander of 
the Faithful ‘Umar supplied him with a massive number of Muslims, 
at the head of which were ~Ammaar Ibn Yaasir, Al-Baraa’ Ibn Maalik 
and Anas Ibn Maalik and Maja'ah Al-Bakriy and Salamah Ibn Rajaa’. 
The two armies — the Muslims under the command of Abu Muusaa 
and the Persians under the command of Hurmuzan — met in the 
battle which was one of the fiercest in ruthlessness and violence. The 
Persians withdrew inside the fortified city of Tustar and the Muslims 
besieged it for many days until] Abu Muusaa employed his skill and 
intelligence and sent 200 cavalry men with a Persian agent. Abu 
Muusaa instructed him to enter the fort in order to open the gate of 
the city in front of the advanced guard which he chose for the 
mission. The gates had hardly opened when the soldiers of the 
advanced guard charged on the fortified citadel until Abu Muusaa 
swooped down with his army in a massive attack. 


He captured this important fortified position in only hours, and 
the Persian leader surrendered, after which Abu Muusaa sent them to 
Al-Madiinah to learn the Commander of the Faithful's judgment. 


However, this fighter of great prowess did not leave the field of 
battle until he changed to a persistent worshiper with much weeping, 
and was mild-tempered, peaceable, and gentle-hearted as a 
sparrow. 


He recited the Qur'aan with such a voice that made the inner 
heart of the one who listened to it tremble that the Messenger (PBUH) 
said about him, " Abu Muusaa was given a musical voice like the 
musical instruments of the people of Dawuud." Every time “Umar 
saw him he called him to recite to him from the Book of Allah saying 
to him, "Make us aspire to our Lord, O Abu Muusaa." 


Also, Abu Muusaa did not participate in fighting except against 
the army of the polytheists or armies fighting against the religion, 
wanting to extinguish the light of Allah. 


466 


Whenever there was a fight between Muslims, he indeed ran 
away from it and never had any role in it. This position of his was 
clear in the dispute between “Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah and in the war 
which ignited between the Muslims, as we shall see. 


Perhaps this point, from the account which follows, will bring 
us to an understanding of the most famous position of his life, and 
that is his position in the arbitration between Imam ~Aliy and 
Mu’aawiyah. This position is often taken as evidence of the 
immoderation in Abu Muusaa's good nature or his extraordinary 
naivete, which made tricking him quite easy. However, the situation, 
as we shall see, in spite of what hastiness or error there might have 
been, reveals the greatness of his soul, the greatness of his faith in the 
truth and in people. 


Indeed, the view of Abu Muusaa in the case of arbitration can 
be summarized by the fact that he saw the Muslims killing one 
another and each party fanatically clinging to its Imam (ruler). As he 
saw it, the situation between the combatants had reached a critical 
state that was impossible of resolve and placed the destiny of the 
Muslim nation on the edge of an abyss. In his opinion, the situation 
had reached a stage of deterioration. It was exemplified in the change 
of the whole situation, which thus required starting over again. 


The civil war, at that point, revolved around two parties of the 
Muslims disputing over the person of the ruler. Some desired Imam 
“Aliy to relinquish the caliphate temporarily and Mu‘aawiyah to 
renounce it, so that the entire matter could be referred again to the 
Muslims. Then, they could choose, by way of consultation, the caliph 
they wanted. This was how Abu Muusaa argued the case and this 
was the way he saw its resolution. 


It is correct that Imam ~Aliy was soundly sworn in as caliph 
and correct that every illegal rebellion should not be allowed to 
achieve its aim of overturning the legal right. However, the issues in 
the dispute between the Imam and Mu‘aawiyah and between the 
peoples of Iraq and Syria had, in the view of Abu Muusaa, reached a 


467 


state which imposed a new kind of thinking and resolution. For 
the insurgency of Mu‘aawiyah was not considered just a revolt alone, 
and the rebellion of the people of Syria was not considered just an 
insurrection alone, and the entire difference was not considered just a 
difference in opinion nor a matter of choice. All these things 
developed into a harmful civil war in which thousands were killed on 
both sides and continued to threaten Islam and Muslims with the | 
worst ramifications and consequences. So removal of the causes of 
the dispute and war and stepping aside of both parties was in the 
thinking of Abu Muusaa, the starting point on the road to salvation. 


The view of Imam ~Aliy, when he accepted the principle of 
arbitration, was that “Abd Allah Ibn Abbaas or someone from 
among his companions would represent his front in arbitration,but a 
large party of those with power in his group and army imposed on 
him Abu Muusaa Al-Ash‘ariy. The reason for their choice of Abu 
Muusaa was that he had never participated in the dispute between 
*Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah since the dispute began, but had separated 
himself from both parties after giving up all hope of encouraging the 
two of them to a common understanding and peace. So he withdrew 
from the fight between them. He had, from this respect, the most right 
of all the people to arbitrate. 


There was nothing in the religion of Abu Muusaa nor in his 
sincerity and truthfulness that made the Imam suspicious. 
Nevertheless, he did realize the intentions of the other side and the 
degree of their dependency on maneuvers, deception, and trickery, 
and that Abu Muusaa, inspite of his understanding and knowledge, 
hated deception and maneuvers and loved to deal with people on the 
basis of truth and not his wits. Therefore, Imam ‘Aliy was afraid 
Abu Muusaa would be deceived by the others and that the 
arbitration would be turned into maneuvers by one side, which 
would make matters worst. 


The arbitration between the two parties began, with Abu 
Muusaa Al-Ash*ariy representing the party of Imam ~Aliy and “Amr 


468 


Ibn Al-‘Aag representing the party of Mu‘aawiyah. It is true that 
“Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas depended on his sharp wits and his broad cunning 
in carrying the banner for Mu‘aawiyah. 


The meeting between the two men, Al-Ash‘ariy and ‘Amr, 
began with a proposal presented by Abu Muusaa. It was for the two 
arbitrators to agree on the nomination of “Abd Allah Ibn ‘Umar, 
declaring him the Caliph of the Muslims because he enjoyed a broad 
concensus in respect to his love, admiration, and distinction. ~Amr 
Ibn Al--Aas saw in this orientation and direction of Abu Muusaa a 
great opportunity, so he took advantage of it. 


The content of the proposal by Abu Muusaa did not consider a 
conditional link with the party which he represented, which was the 
party of Imam “Aliy. That meant, also, that Abu Muusaa was ready 
to give support and backing for caliph to others from among the 
Prophet's Companions, the proof for that point being his suggestion 
. of “Abd Allah Ibn “Umar. 


Thus, “Amr found, by his shrewdness and wits, a wide 
entrance for the achievement of his goal. So he therefore suggested 
Mu*aawiyah. Then he suggested his own son “Abd Allah, who 
possessed a great position among the Messenger's Companions. The 
intelligence of Abu Muusaa was not less than the wits of ‘Amr. 
When he saw “Amr adopting the principle of nomination as a rule for 
the discussion of arbitration, he boldly confronted ~Amr, saying that 
the choice of caliph was the right of all Muslims and that Allah had 
made their affair one of consultation between themselves, so it was 
incumbent to leave them alone entirely to the right of choice. 


We shall now see how “Amr exploited this lofty principle for 
the interest of Mu‘aawiyah. However, before that, let us listen to the 
historical dialogue which took place between Abu Muusaa and “Amr 
Ibn Al--Aas at the beginning of their meeting. We transmit it on the 
authority of the book Al-Akhbaar At-Tawaal by Abu Hunaifah Ad- 
Daiyanuuriy; 


469 


Abu Muusaa: O ‘Amr, do you desire in this matter the good of 
the nation and the pleasure of Allah? 


~Amr: And what is it? 
Abu Muusaa: That we appoint “Abd Allah Ibn “Umar, for 
indeed he never involved himself in the war. 


‘Amr: And where are you with respect to Mu‘aawiyah? 


Abu Muusaa: Mu‘aawiyah does not deserve it nor is he worthy 
of it. 


Amr: Do you not know that *Uthmaan was unjustly killed? 


Abu Muusaa: Yes. 

Amr: So indeed Mu’aawiyah is guardian (walii) of the blood of 
~Uthmaan and his house is in the Quraish, as you know. So the 
people said, Why not assume responsibility for the matter since 
it has no precedents. In that you have no excuse. You say, | 
indeed found him the guardian of ‘Uthmaan’'s blood and Allah 
Most High says, <And whoever is killed (intentionally with 
hostility and oppression and not by mistake), We have given 
his heir [walii] the authority > (17: 33). 


The brother of Umm Habiibah, the wife of the Prophet (PBUH) 
has this and he is one of his Companions. 


Abu Muusaa: Fear Allah, O *Amr! As for what you mentioned 
concerning the nobility of Mu‘aawiyah, if worthiness for the 
caliphite were based on nobility, the one with the most right to 
it among the people would be Abrahah Ibn As-Sabbaah, for 
indeed he is one of the sons in the line of the kings of Yemen, 
who ruled the east of the earth and its west. Furthermore, how 
does the nobility of Mu‘aawiyah compare withthat of ~Aliy Ibn 
Abi Taalib? As for your talk that Mu‘aawiyah was the 
guardian of ~Uthmaan's blood, his son “Amr Ibn “Uthmaan is 
more *Uthmaan's guardian than he. But if you acceded to me, 


470 


we would revive the practice of ‘Umar Ibn 
Al-Khattaab and his son ‘Abd Allah. 


“Amr: What prevents you from my son ‘Abd Allah, with his 
merit and goodness and his previous Hijrah and his 
companionship? 


Abu Muusaa: Indeed your son is a truthful man, but you have 
completely immersed him into these wars. We have made it (i.e. 
the caliphate) for a good man and the son of a good man. ~Abd 
Allah Ibn “Umar. 


“Amr: O Abu Muusaa, no man is suitable for this affair unless 
he has two molars. He eats with one and he feeds (others) with 
the other. 


Abu Muusaa: Woe to you, O “Amr! Indeed, the Muslims have 
entrusted the matter to us, after they have fought with one 
another by force of arms and swords. Do not hurt them with 
spears! Do not turn them back to civil war and discord. 


“Amr: So what do you see? 


Abu Muusaa: I see that we should depose the two men, ~Aliy 
and Mu*‘aawiyah. Then make consultation between the 
Muslims. They will choose for themselves who they want. 


‘Amr: I am pleased with this view. So indeed the goodness of 
the heart is in it. This argument completely changes the form 
which we are accustomed to see. 


This argument completely changes the form which we are 
accustomed to see every time we mention the incident of arbitration. 
Indeed, in these arguments Abu Muusaa was not of a neglectful 
mind, but very active. On the contrary, in this dialogue, his 
intelligence was more active than the intellect of “Amr Ibn Al- Aas, 
who was famous for his wit and shrewdness. So when “Amr wanted 


471 


to propose the caliphate of Mu‘aawiyah based on genealogy in the 
Quraish and guardianship of the blood of *Uthmaan, the refutation 
of Abu Muusaa came sharply and brilliantly as the edge of a sword. 


"If the caliphate were based on nobility, then Abrahah Ibn As- 
Sabbaah, who is from a line of kings, is more worthy of guardianship 
than Mu*aawiyah. And if the caliphate were based on guardianship 
of the blood of ‘Uthmaan and defense of his right, then Ibn “Uthmaan 
is more worthy of this guardianship than Mu‘aawiyah." 


After this dialogue, the responsibility for what followed was 
assumed by~ Amr Ibn Al--Aas alone. 


So, Abu Muusaa was exonerated from guilt by referring the 
matter back to the nation to give their word and choose their caliph. 
‘Amr agreed and adhered to this view. It did not come to his mind 
that “Amr was going to threaten Islam and the Muslims with an evil 
disaster, and that he would resort to maneuvers whatever may be his 
conviction about Mu‘aawiyah. Ibn ~Abbaas warned him when he 
returned to them and informed them about the maneuvers of “Amr 
and said to him, "By Allah I fear that “Amr will trick you, so if the 
two of you agree on something, let him come forward before you to 
speak. Then you speak after him." 


However, Abu Muusaa saw the situation on a more lofty and 
sublime level than the maneuvers of “Amr. From then on, he had no 
doubt or suspicion of the commitment of ~Amr with regards to what 
they had agreed on. They gathered the following day, Abu Muusaa 
representing the side of Imam “Aliy and “Amr Ibn Al-Aas 
representing the side of Mu‘aawiyah. Abu Muusaa invited “Amr to 
speak first, but “Amr refused and said to him, "I am not going to 
precede you when you are more virtuous than I, and emigrated before 
me, and are older than me." 


Abu Muusaa advanced first and greeted the waiting crowd 
from both parties and said, “O people, indeed, in this matter 


472 


concerning which Allah has gathered together this nation and to put 
its affair in proper order, we do not see anything better than the 
deposition of the two men, “Aliy and Mu*‘aawiyah and to call for 
consultation among the people to choose for themselves whom they 
like. Therefore, | depose “Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah. So take upon 
yourselves as guardians whom you love." 


Now, the turn of “Amr Ibn Al-*Aas came to announce the 
deposition of Mu‘aawiyah, just as Abu Muusaa had deposed “Aliy, 
in fulfillment of the confirmed, established agreement of the previous 
day. 


‘Amr ascended the pulpit and said,"O people, indeed, Abu 
Muusaa has said what you heard and deposed his companion. 
Indeed, I depose his companion just as he deposed him and confirm 
my companion Mu’aawiyah. He is indeed, the guardian of the 
Commander of the Faithful “Uthmaan and the guardian of his blood 
and the one having the most right to his dignified position." 


Abu Muusaa did not conceive as possible this sudden 
happening, and he reprimanded “Amr severely with angry and 
furious words. 


He returned again to his seclusion and made his way swiftly to 
Makkah, in the vicinity of the House of Allah and spent there the 
remainder of his days. 


Abu Muusaa (May Allah be pleased with him) had a position 
of trust and love with the Messenger and a position of trust with his 
Companions and successors. In his life the Prophet gave him, along 
with Mu’aadh Ibn Jabal, the governorship over Yemen. After the 
death of the Messenger, he returned to Al-Madiinah to carry his 
responsibility in the great holy war which the Muslim armies engaged 
in against Persia and Rome. 


In the period of ‘Umar the Commander of the Faithful, Abu 
Muusaa was governor of Basra, and Caliph ‘Uthmaan put him in 


473 


charge of Kufa. He was one of the people of the Qur'aan, those who 
memorized it, understood it, and acted on it. Some of his radiant 
words about the Qur'aan were " Follow the Qur'aan and do not desire 
that the Qur'aan should follow you." 


He was of the people of persistent worship and on the very 
days which almost caused the breath of people to pass away, he 
would yearn to fast and say, “Perhaps the thirst of the midday heat 
will be intercession for us on the Day of Judgment." 


On that humid day, his appointed time of death came to him 
and covered his countenance with a radiance which is for those who 
hope for the mercy of Allah and a good reward. And the words 
which he was always repeating during his faithful life, his tongue 
went on repeating while he was in the departing moments of death: 
"O Allah, You are peace and from You is peace." 


474 


(58) 
AT-TUFAIL IBN “AMR AD-DAWSIY 
The Rightly Guided Nature 


In the land of Daws, he grew up in a noble, respected family. 
He was gifted with poetry, and his fame and excellence spread 
among the tribes. During the season of ‘Ukaadh, when Arab poets 
came from all directions and the people gathered and assembled to 
show off their poetry, At-Tufail used to take his place in the 
forefront. 


He used to frequent Makkah at times other than ~Ukaadh. 
Once he visited Makkah when the Messenger had just started 
declaring his mission and the Quraish feared that At-Tufail would 
meet him and convert to Islam and then put his poetic gift at the 
service of Islam. That would be a curse upon the Quraish and their 
idols. On account of this, they circled around him and prepared for 
him a hospitality that included every kind of joy, comfort, and ease. 
Then they went on to warn him about meeting the Messenger of Allah. 
They said to him, "He has charming speech like magic and he makes 
division between a man and his son, and a man and his brother, and 
a man and his wife. I fear for you and your people from him. So do 
not talk to him nor listen to any talk from him." 


Let us listen to At-Tufail himself telling the remainder of the 
story: So by Allah, they were still insisting on my not listening to 
anything from him and not meeting him. And when I went over to the 
Ka’bah, I filled my ears with cotton so as not to hear anything he had 
to say when he spoke. There I found him standing praying at the Ka‘ 
bah, so I stood close to him. Allah refused nothing but He made me 
hear some portion of what he was reading. 1 heard a fine speech, 
and I said to myself, "Oh, may I lose my mother! Indeed I am an 
intelligent poet. I would not fail to recognize the good from the ugly. 
What is it that hinders me from listening to the man and what he 
says? If that which he brings is good, I should accept it, and if it is 
bad... ." 


475 


I stayed until Muhammad departed to his house. I followed 
him until he entered his house, so I entered behind him and said to 
him, "O Muhammad, verily your people have told me such-and-such 
about you. By Allah, they kept making me afraid of you until I 
blocked my ears with cotton in order not to hear your words. But 
Allah willed that I hear, so I heard a fine speech. Set forth to me your 
message.” 


So the Messenger presented to me Islam and recited to me from 
the Qur'aan. By Allah, I had never heard a speech better than it, nor 
a matter more just than it. So, I surrendered and bore witness to the 
truth. 


I said, "O Messenger of Allah, indeed I am a person of 
credibility among my people and J am returning to them to invite them 
to Islam, so call on Allah to make a sign for me that will be a help for 
me in that which I call them to." He said, "O Allah, make for him a 


sign." 


Allah has spoken appreciatively in His book < Those who 
listen to the speech and follow the best part of it > (39:18). 


We have met one of those great people and he is, indeed, a true 
picture of the image of the rightly guided nature. 


So, no sooner had he heard it than he accepted the message of 
some of the blessed guiding verses which Allah had revealed to the 
heart of His Messenger until all his hearing was opened and all his 
heart, until he stretched out his right hand to swear the oath of 
allegiance. Not only that, but he immediately took upon himself the 
responsibility of inviting his people and kin to this religion of truth 
and the straight path. 


For this reason, as soon as he reached his country and house in 
the land of Daws, he confronted his father about that which was in 


476 


his heart concerning the principles of faith and perseverance. He 
called his father to Islam after speaking to him about the Messenger 
who calls to Allah. He spoke to him about his greatness, about his 
purity and honesty, and his father became a Muslim immediately. 
Then he went to his mother, and she became a Muslim. Then to his 
wife, and she became a Muslim. When he was sure _ that Islam had 
swept over his household, he moved on to his tribe and to all the 
inhabitants of Daws. However, no one from among them accepted 
Islam except Abu Hurairah (May Allah be pleased with him). 


They went on disappointing him and turning away from him 
until he ran out of patience with them, so he rode his beast, cutting 
through the desert, returning to the Messenger of Allah to complain to 
him and to take more and more of his teachings. When he arrived in 
Makkah, he hastened to the house of the Messenger, driven by his 
yearning to see him. He said to the Prophet (PBUH), "O Messenger 
of Allah, indeed adultery and usury have beaten me in our fight over 
Daws. So, call on Allah to destroy Daws." Suddenly, At-Tufail was 
baffled when he saw the Messenger (PBUH) raise his hands to the 
sky while saying," O Allah, guide Daws and bring them to Islam as 
Muslims." Then he turned to At-Tufail and said to him, " Return to 
your people, call them and be lenient with them." 


This scene filled the soul of At-Tufail with awe and filled his 
spirit with peace. He thanked Allah with the deepest praise for 
making this human merciful Messenger his teacher and instructor, 
and for making Islam his religion and his joy. He returned to his land 
and people, and there he went on calling to Islam gradually and 
leniently, just as the Messenger had advised him. 


During the period he spent among his people, the Messenger 
emigrated to Al-Madiinah and the battles of Badr, ‘Uhud and 
Khandaq took place. While the Messenger of Allah was in Khaibar, 
after Allah had given the Muslims victory over it, a full procession 
including 80 families from Daws approached the Messenger saying, 
"There is no god but Allah and Allah is the Greatest." They sat before 
him giving the oath of allegiance one after the other. 


When this lavish spectacle of theirs and their blessed oath was 
over , At-Tufail Ibn “Amr sat alone by himself reiterating his 
memories and contemplating his steps along-the way. He 
remembered the day he came to the Messenger asking him to raise his 
hands to the sky saying, "O Allah, destroy Daws." Yet, the Prophet 
supplicated and humbly prayed to Allah on that day with another 
prayer which aroused his amazement. "O Allah, guide Daws and 
bring them to Islam as Muslims." And Allah had guided Daws and 
brought them as Muslims. And here they were, 80 families of them, 
consisting of the majority of its inhabitants, taking their place in the 
pure ranks behind the trustworthy Messenger of Allah. 


+ + * 


At-Tufail continued his work with the believing community, and 
on the day of the Conquest of Makkah, he entered it with tens of 
thousands of Muslims. They never withdrew in pride and strength 
but with their foreheads bowed in adoration, glorifying and thanking 
Allah Who rewarded them with victory and a clear help. 


At-Tufail saw the Messenger of Allah destroying the idols of 
the Ka‘bah and purifying it with his own hands from the impurity 
which had lingered for so long. Immediately afterwards, he 
remembered an idol belonging to‘Amr Ibn Humamah. Whenever he 
stayed over as his guest, he used to show it to him, so he became 
fearful in its presence and pleaded to it. Now the opportunity had 
come for At-Tufail to erase the sin of those days from his soul. He 
approached the Messenger, requesting permission to go burn the idol 
of Humamah called "The Two Palms", and the Prophet (PBUH) gave 
him permission. 


At-Tufail went over and lit the fire on it and every time the 
flame went down, he stoked it again to a blazing fire. All the while 
he said, 


O Idol of Two Palms, 
I am not one of your worshipers. 


478 


Our origin is older than your origin. 
I have filled fire in your heart. 


Thus did At-Tufail live with the Prophet (PBUH), praying 
behind him, learning from him, and fighting with him. The Prophet 
(PBUH) was transported to the most exalted horizon. However, At- 
Tufail saw that his responsibility as a Muslim did not end with the 
death of the Messenger, but rather it was about to start. Therefore, no 
sooner had the apostasy wars erupted than At-Tufail prepared for 
them and embarked courageously on their hardships and terrors with 
a yearning for martyrdom. He participated in the apostasy wars, 
battle after battle. 


In the Battle of Al-Yamaamah, he went out with the Muslims 
accompanied by his son “Amr Ibn At-Tufail. At the beginning of the 
battle he advised his son to fight the army of Musailamah the Liar, 
like one who desires death and martyrdom. 


He told him that he felt he would die in this battle, and thus his 
sword carried him. He plunged into the fight in a glorious 
performance. He did not defend his life with his sword but he 
defended his sword with his life. So, when he died his body fell 
down, but the sword remained sharp and intact so that another hand 
whose owner had not yet fallen could strike with it . 


In the battle, At-Tufail Ad-Dawsiy was martyred. His body fell 
down under the flurry of stabs and strikes while he was waving to his 
son, who was unable to see him admist the crowd. 


He was waving to him as if he were calling him to follow and 
join him. And he did actually follow him, but after a while. In the 
Battle of Yarmuuk in Syria, “Amr Ibn At-Tufail went out to fight and 
died as a martyr. At the time his spirit was coming out of his breast, 
he extended his right hand and opened his palm as if he would shake 
the hand of someone else. And who knows ? Perhaps at that time he 
was shaking the spirit of his father. 


479 


(59) 
“AMR IBN AL - A/S 
Liberator of Egypt from Rome ! 


There were three from the Quraish who used to trouble the 
Messenger of Allah (PBUH) with the fierceness of their resistance to 
his call and their torture of his Companions. 


The Messenger called them and pleaded to his glorious Lord to 
inflict them with His punishment, and while he was calling and 
inviting, he received the revelation of these noble verses: < The matter 
is not in your hands, whether GOD turns to them or chastises them, 
for surely they are evildoers > (3: 128). 


The Messenger's understanding of the verse was that he was to 
stop calling Allah to punish them and to leave their affair to Allah 
alone. Either they would continue their wrongdoing and His 
punishment would be inflicted upon them, or He would accept their 
repentance. 


They repented, so His mercy reached them. ~Amr Ibn Al- Aas 
was one of these three. Allah had chosen for them the path of 
repentance and mercy, so He guided them to Islam. He transformed 
*Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas into a Muslim fighter and into one of the brave 
leaders of Islam. 


In spite of some of ‘Amr's positions, his point of view of which 
we cannot be convinced, he played a role as a glorious Companion; he 
sacrificed and gave generously; he was a defender and combatant, 
and our eyes and our hearts shall continue to open on his 
countenance, especially here in Egypt. Those who see in Islam a 
glorious valuable religion and see in its Messenger a merciful gift and 
a blessed gift. Those who see the truthful Messenger who called to 
Allah according to clear vision and inspired life abundantly with its 
sensible conduct, forthrightness and devout piety. Those who carry 
this faith shall continue with enhanced allegiance to look to the man 


480 


whom fate made the cause — for whatever reason — for the 
introduction of Islam to Egypt and the guidance of Egypt to Islam. 
So, blessed is the gift and blessed is the gift giver. 


That is he, “Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas. The historians were accustomed 
to describing ~Amr as the conqueror of Egypt. However, I see in this 
description an underestimation and an overestimation. Perhaps a 
more truthful description of “Amr would be that which we call him, 
“Liberator of Egypt". For Islam did not conquer the country with the 
modern understanding of conquering, but it liberated it from the 
hegemony of two imperial powers, two modes of worship of two 
countries, and the worst punishment, the imperial power of Persia 
and the imperial power of Rome. 


Egypt, in particular, on the day the advanced guard of Islam 
appeared, had been plundered by the Romans, and its inhabitants 
were resisting without result. When the shouts of believing armies 
reverberated over the frontiers of their country, "Allah akbaar! (Allah 
is the Greatest)" they hastened all together, in a glorious crowd, 
toward the coming dawn and embraced it, finding in it liberation from 
Caesar and from Rome. 


So, “Amr and his men did not conquer Egypt but opened the 
way for Egypt to attach its destiny to the truth, tie its fate to justice, 
and find itself and its reality in the light of the words of Allah and the 
principles of Islam. He was careful to separate the inhabitants of 
Egypt and its Copts away from the army and keep the fighting 
restricted between himself and the Romans who occupied the land 
and robbed the wealth of its people. 


On account of that, we find him talking to the Christian leaders 
of that day and their high priest. He said to them, "Indeed Allah sent 
Muhammad with the truth and ordered him to teach it. The Prophet 
carried out his mission, and he died after leaving us on that path, the 
clear straight path. Among the things he ordered us to do was to be 
responsible to the people, so we call you to Islam. Whoever responds 
is of us. He has what we have and he has the same rights and 


481 


obligations as we do. And whoever does not respond to Islam, we 
enforce on him the payment of jizyah and we offer to him defense and. 
protection. Our Prophet informed us that Egypt would open for us 
and advised us to be good to its people, saying, ‘Egypt will be opened 
to you after me, so you are advised to treat its Copts well, for indeed, 
they have a covenant of protection and kinship relations,’ so if you 
answer to what we call you to, you will have protection and security." 


No sooner had ~Amr finished his words, than some of the 
priests and rabbis shouted, saying, "Indeed the kinship of which your 
Prophet advised you is a remote kinship relationship, the like of 
which cannot be reached except by the prophets.” This was a good 
start for the hoped-for understanding between “Amr and the Copts 
of Egypt, in spite of what the Roman leader had tried to do to 
frustrate it. 


‘Amr Ibn Al--Aas was not among the earliest ones to embrace 
Islam. He embraced Islam with Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid, just shortly 
before the Conquest of Makkah. It is surprising that his Islam began 
at the hands of An-Najaashiy in Abyssinia, and that is because An- 
Nagaashiy knew “Amr and respected him because of his several visits 
to Abyssinia and abundant gifts which he used to carry to An- 
Najaashiy. In his final visit to that country, mention was made of the 
Prophet who was calling to monotheism and to the nobility of morals 
in the Arabian Peninsula. The Abyssinian ruler asked ~“Amr, "How 
could you not believe in him and follow him, when he is truly a 
Messenger from Allah?" “Amr then asked An-Najaashiy, " Is he 
thus?" An Najaashiy answered, "Yes, so obey me, O “Amr, and 
follow him, for indeed, by Allah, he is on the path of truth and he will 
surpass those who stood against him!" 


“Amr traveled, taking the sea route, immediately returning to his 
country and turning his face in the direction of Al-Madiinah to 
surrender to Allah, Lord of the Worlds. 


482 


On the road leading to Al-Madiinah, he met Khaalid Ibn Al- 
Waliid coming from Makkah, going also to the Messenger to swear 
allegiance to Islam. No sooner did the Messenger see the two of them 
coming than his face beamed with joy and he said to his Companions, 
"Makkah has gifted you with its most noble leaders.” Khaliid 
approached and swore allegiance. Then “Amr approached and said, 
"Indeed, I swear allegiance to you provided that you ask Allah to 
forgive me my previous sins." So the Messenger answered him saying, 
"O “Amr, swear allegiance, for indeed Islam disregards whatever 
preceded it.” 


‘Amr swore allegiance and placed his wits and bravery at the 
service of his new religion. When the Messenger passed on to Allah, 
Most Exalted, “Amr was appointed ruler over Oman and during the 
caliphate of ‘Umar he performed his famous deeds in the Syrian 
wars and then in the liberation of Egypt from the rule of Rome. 


* * * 


Oh, if only “Amr Ibn Al-‘Aas could have resisted the love of 
commanding and rule in his soul, then he would have greatly 
overcome some of the positions which this love entangled him in. Yet, 
“Amr's love for the authority of ruling, to a certain extent, was a direct 
expression of his nature, which was filled with talent. Moreover, his 
external appearance, his way of walking and conversing, indicated 
that he was created for commanding to the extent that it has been 
related that the Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab 
saw “Amr once approaching, so he smiled at the way he was walking 
and said, "It should not be for Abu ‘Abd Allah to walk on the earth 
except as a commander." 


The truth also is that Abu ‘Abd Allah did not forget the right. 
Even when dangerous events overwhelmed the Muslims, ‘Amr dealt 
with these events in a commanding manner, as one who possesses 
intelligence, wits, and a capability which made him self-confident and 
proud of his excellence. Moreover, he possessed such a portion of 
honesty that it made ‘Umar Ibn Al-Khattaab — even though he 


483 


was strict in choosing his governor — choose “Amr as governor over 
Palestine and Jordan, then over Egypt, throughout the life of ‘Umar. 
This even though the Commander of the Faithful knew that “Amr had 
exceeded a certain limit in the opulence of his life style, while the 
Commander of the Faithful demanded from his governors to set an 
example by staying always at the level or at least close to the 
general level of the people. 


Even though the caliph knew about the abundance of ~Amr's 
wealth, he did not remove him but sent Muhammad Ibn Maslamah to 
him and ordered “Amr to split with him, all of his wealth and 
possessions. So, he left him one half of it and carried the other half 
to the treasury in Al-Madiinah. However, if the Commander of the 
Faithful had known that ~Amr's love for wealth would lead him to 
carelessness in his responibility, it is conceivable that his reasonable 
conscience would not have allowed him to stay in power for even one 
moment. 


~Amr (May Allah be pleased with him) was sharp-witted with 
strong intuitive understanding and deep vision, so much so that 
whenever the Commander of the Faithful saw a person incapable of 
artifice, he clapped his palms in astonishment and said, "Glory be to 
Allah | Indeed, the Creator of this and the Creator of “Amr Ibn Al- 
* Aas is one God!" 


~Amr was also very daring and unhesitant. He used to combine 
his daring with his wits in some instances so that he would be thought 
to be cowardly or hesitant. However, it was the capacity to trick 
which ~Amr perfected with great skill to get himself out of a 
destructive crisis. 


The Commander of the Faithful “Umar knew these talents of his 
and appreciated their true value. For that reason, when he sent him 
to Syria, before his going to Egypt, it was said to the Commander of 
the Faithful, "At the head of the armies of Rome in Syria is Artubun, 


484 


a shrewd and brave leader and a prince.". ‘Umar's response was, 
“We have hurled at Artubun of Rome Artubun of the Arabs, so let us 
see how the matter unfolds." 


Matters unfolded in a massive victory for the Artubun of the 
Arabs, their dangerous, sly old fox, ~Amr Ibn Al-* Aas, over the 
Artubun of Rome, who left his army to defeat and fled to Egypt. 
‘Amr would catch him shortly thereafter to raise the standard of 
Islam above its secure lands. 


* * * 


What are the situations in which the intelligence and wits of 
“Amr excelled? We do not count among them his position with Abu 
Muusaa Al-Ash‘ariy in the incident of arbitration when the two of 
them agreed to depose ~Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah to refer the matter back 
to consultation between the Muslims. Abu Muusaa implemented the 
agreement and “Amr relented from carrying out his part of the 
agreement. 


If we want to witness a picture of his wits and the skill of his 
intuitive insight, we find it in his position with respect to the 
commander of the Citadel of Babylon (near present day Cairo) during 
his war with Rome in Egypt, and, in another historical narration, in 
the battle we shall mention which took place in Yarmuuk with 
Artubun of Rome. 


When Artubun and the commander invited ~Amr to talk, they 
gave an order to some of their men to throw a rock at him 
immediately upon his departure from the Citadel and to prepare 
everything so that the killing of “Amr would be an inevitable matter. 


“Amr met the commander, not suspecting anything from him, 
and their meeting ended. While ~Amr was on his way out of the 
Citadel, he glimpsed over the walls something suspicious that aroused 
in hima strong sense of danger, and immediately he behaved in an 


485 


outstanding manner. He returned back to the commander of the 
Citadel, in safe, secure, slow steps, with confident, happy feelings, as 
if nothing had scared him at all or had aroused his suspicion. He met 
the commander and said to him, "An idea came across my mind I 
wanted you to know. I have with me, where my companions are 
camped, a group from among the first Companions of the Messenger 
to enter into Islam. The Commander of the Faithful would not decide 
anything without consulting them and would not send an army unless 
he put them at the head of its fighters and soldiers. I will bring them 
to you so that they hear from you that which I heard, so they will 
become as clear in the matter as I am." 


The Roman commander realized that ‘Amr, by his naivete, had 
granted him the opportunity of a lifetime. Therefore, he thought, Let 
us agree with him, and when he returns with this number of Muslim 
commanders and the best of their men and their leaders, we will 
deliver the coup de grace and finish off all of them at once, instead of 
finishing off ~Amr alone. 


Secretly he gave his order to put off the plan that was devised 
to assasinate “Amr, and he saw “Amr off cordially and shook his 
hand with enthusiasm and fervor. “Amr smiled the most intelligent of 
Arab smiles as he was leaving the Citadel. 


In the morning “Amr returned to the Citadel at the head of an 
army , mounted on his horse that whinnied in a loud burst of 
laughter, behaving proudly and haughtily and making fun. Yes, for 
it, too, knew a lot of things about the shrewdness of its owner. 


In A.H. 43, death caught up with “Amr Ibn Al--Aas in Egypt, 
where he was ruling. He recaptured his life in the moments of 
departure, saying, "In the first part of my life I was a disbeliever, and 
I was one of the fiercest people against the Messenger of Allah, so if I 
had died on that day, the fire would have been my fate. Then, I 
swore allegiance to the Messenger of Allah, and there was no person 
more dear to me than he and more glorious in my eyes than he. If I 
wanted to describe him, I could not, because | was not able to fill my 


486 


eyes with him on account of being in awe of him. If I had died back 
then, I would have wished to be of the inhabitants of Paradise. Then 
after that I was tested with command and with material things. I do 
not know if they were for me or against me." 


Then he raised his sight to the sky in awe, calling upon his Lord, 

the Merciful, the Magnificent, saying, "O Allah, ] am not innocent, so 

forgive me. I am not mighty, so help me. And if Your mercy does not 
come to me, | will surely be of those destroyed." 


And he continued in his yearning and his prayers until his spirit 
ascended to Allah and his last words were, “There is no god but 
Allah." 


Under the ground of Egypt, which ‘Amr acquainted with the 
path of Islam, where his corpse was finally placed, and above its 
hard earth, his seat is still standing throughout the centuries. Here he 
used to teach, judge, and rule, beneath the ceiling of his ancient 
mosque, the Mosque of “Amr, the first mosque in Egypt, in which the 
name of Allah, the One and Only is mentioned and declared between 
its walls and from its pulpit, the words of Allah and the principles of 
Islam. 


487 


(60) 
SAALIM MAWLAA ABIHUDHAIFAH 
Blessed Be the Carrier of the Qur'aan 


The Messenger of Allah(PBUH) advised his Companions one 
day, "Take the Qur'aan from four people: “Abd Allah Ibn Mas*uud, 
Saalim Mawlaa Abi Hudhaifah, Ubai Ibn Ka*b and Mu‘aadh Ibn 
Jabal.” 


We have met before with Ibn Mas*uud and Ubai and Mu‘aadh. 
So, who was this fourth Companion whom the Messenger made as an 
authority for the teaching of the Qur'aan and a source of reference? 


Verily, he was Saalim Mawlaa Abi Hudhaifah. He was a kind 
servant. Islam was exalted on account of him until it made him a son 
of one of the great Muslims who, before his Islam, was honored to be 
one of the most noble of the Quraish and one of their leaders. When 
Islam cancelled the practice of adoption, he became a brother, a 
friend, a protector of those whom he had adopted. Such was the 
glorious Companion, Abu Hudhaifah Ibn “Utbah. By the grace of 
Allah and His favor upon Saalim, he reached an elevated lofty 
position which his spiritual virtues, along with his behavior and his 
piety, had prepared him for. 


Saalim Mawlaa Abi Hudhaifah was known by that name 
because he had been a slave and emancipated. He believed in Allah 
and His Messenger early, and took his place among the first 
generation. 


Abu Hudhaifah Ibn “Utbah became Muslim at an early age and 
hastened to Islam, leaving his father, “Utbah Ibn Rabii-ah, swallowing 
his anger and his concerns which disturbed the purity of his life, due 
to the Islam of his son, who was noble among his people. His father 
had been preparing him for leadership among the Quraish. 


488 


Abu Hudhaifah adopted Saalim and emancipated him, and he 
became known as Saalim Ibn Abi Hudhaifah. Both of them 
continuously worshiped their Lord in awe and fear and were 
extremely patient under the hardship of the Quraish and their 
schemes. 


One day, verses of the Qur'aan were revealed which outlawed 
the practice of adoption and every adopted person returned to 
carrying the name of his real father who had begotten him. So, Zaid 
Ibn Haarithah, for example, whom the Prophet had adopted andwho 
had been known among the Muslims as Zaid Ibn Muhammad, 
returned to carrying the name of his father, Haarithah and became 
Zaid Ibn Haarithah. But Saalim's father was not known to him, so 
Abu Hudhaifah became his guardian and he was called Saalim 
Mawlaa Abi Hudhaifah. 


Perhaps when it cancelled the practice of adoption Islam 
wanted to say to the Muslims, Do not take kinship nor relationship, 
nor the bond by which you affirm your brotherhood as greater and 
stronger than Islam itself and the religious faith by which you are 
really made brothers. The early Muslims understood this very well. 
So, nothing was more loved to any one of them after Allah and His 
Messenger than their brethren in faith and in Islam. 


We have seen how the Ansgaar welcomed their brethren, the 
Muhaajiruun. They shared with them their wealth, their homes, and 
all they owned. This is what we saw happening between Abu 
Hudhaifah, the noble of the Quraish, and Saalim, who was an 
emancipated slave and did not know his father. 


They remained more than brothers up to the last moment of 
their lives, even until death: they died together spirit with spirit and 
body close to body. This is the unique, incomparable greatnesses of 
Islam, but this is only one of its greatnesses and its superiorities. 


* * * 


489 


Saalim believed with a sincere faith and took his path to Allah 
by adopting the behavior of the devout and pious. Neither his 
genealogy nor his position in society had any consideration for him. 
He was elevated by his piety and sincerity to the highest degree of 
the new society which Islam came to establish and caused to rise on a 
new, great and just foundation, a foundation summarized in the 
following glorious verse < Surely, the most honourable of you in the 
sight of GOD is the most pious of you> (49:13) and in the noble 
hadiiths: "Arabs have no superiority over non-Arabs except in piety" 
and "The son of a white woman has no superiority over the son of a 
black woman except in piety." 


In this new, rightly-guided society, Abu Hudhaifah, who was 
only a slave yesterday, found for himself honor to be in charge, to 
have power and to govern. Moreover, he found honor for his family, 
to marry Saalim to his niece Faatimah Bint Al-Waliid Ibn ~Utbah. 
And in this new, rightly-guided society, which destroyed the unjust 
class structure and outlawed false distinctions and privileges, Saalim 
found himself always in the first rank on account of his truthfulness, 
faith, and bravery. 


Yes, he became an Imam for the Muhaajiruun of Makkah to Al- 
Madiinah during their prayer in the Qubaa' Mosque. There is proof in 
the Book of Allah, when the Prophet ordered the Muslims to learn 
from him. There were with him men of goodness and excellence, 
which made the Messenger say to him, "Praise be to Allah, Who 
made in my nation the like of you." His Muslim brothers called him 
“Saalim from among the Righteous.” 


Indeed, the story of Saalim is like the story of Bilaal and the 
story of many tens of slaves and the poor from whom Islam shook 
off the factors of servitude and weakness and made them Imams and. 


commanders in a society of guidance, reason, integrity of conduct, 
and. frankness. 


Saalim was a receiver of all the rightly guided virtues of Islam. 
These virtues accumulated in him and around him, and his truthful, 


deep faith arranged them in proper order in the most beautiful 
disposition. Among his most prominent virtues was his overt, public 
frankness about what he perceived as the truth. Indeed, he did not 
keep silent when he perceived something which he felt it was his 
duty to speak about. He did not betray life by maintaining silence 
when mistakes were made. 


After Makkah was liberated by the Muslims, the Messenger of 
Allah (PBUH) sent some detachments to villages and tribes around 
Makkah to inform them that whenever he sent someone to them, they 
were coming only as callers to the Faith, so not to harm them or kill 
them. 


At the head of one of these companies was Khaalid Ibn Al- 
Waliid. When Khaalid reached his distination, some incident led him 
to use the sword and shed blood. When the Prophet (PBUH) heard 
the news of these events, he apologized to his Lord a long time saying, 
"O Allah, indeed I absolve myself from all that Khaalid has done." 


The Commander of the Faithful ‘Umar ever remained to 
recollect and assess him saying, "In the sword of Khaalid, indeed, is a 
heavy burden." 


Saalim Mawlaa Abi Hudhaifah accompanied Khaalid on this 
expedition, along with other Companions. As soon as Saalim saw the 
actions of Khaalid, he confronted him with a sharp objection and 
went on enumerating to him the mistakes he had committed. Khaalid, 
the leader, the great hero in both jaahiliyah and Islam, listened the 
first time, defended himself the second time, and became more 
forceful in speech the third time while Saalim, holding on to his point 
of view, spoke without fear or evasion or circumvention in speech. 
Saalim at that time did not look at Khaalid as a nobleman from 
among the nobles of Makkah, while he was one who only yesterday 
was a slave. No, Islam had created equality between them. He did 
not look at him as a leader, venerating his errors, but as a partner in 
duty and responsibility. Moreover, his opposition to Khaalid did not 
originate from a selfish purpose or interest; it was advice, consecrated 


491 


by Islam, which was his right. What he heard all the time from his 
Prophet was a foundation and essence of the entire religion when he 
said, "Religion is sincere advice. Religion is sincere advice. Religion is 
sincere advice." 


When the action of Khaalid reached the Messenger (PBUH), he 
asked , "Did anyone stand up to him?" He did not delay to question, 
and he was not alarmed. His anger was pacified when they said to 
him, "Yes, Saalim critically examined him and opposed him." 


Saalim lived with his Messenger (PBUH) and the believers. He 
did not stay behind from any battle, nor refrain from performing any 
worship, and his brotherliness with Abu Hudhaifah increased daily 
with mutual self-sacrifice and solidarity. 


* * * 


The Messsenger (PBUH) passed away to the Most Exalted 
Guardian and the caliphate of Abu Bakr was confronted with the 
conspiracies of the apostates. Then the Day of Al-Yamaamah came 
and it was a terrible war. Islam had not gone through anything like it. 
The Muslims went out to fight and Saalim and his brother Abu 
Hudhaifah went out to fight in the cause of Allah. At the start of the 
battle, the Muslims did not withstand the attack. However, each 
believer there felt that the battle was his own and the responsibility 
was his own. Khaalid Ibn Al-Waliid gathered them together again 
and reorganized the army with astonishing skill and genius. 


The brothers Abu Hudhaifah and Saalim embraced and pledged 
martyrdom in the cause of the religion of truth which gave them the 
happiness of this world and the next. They threw themselves into the 
vast, terrible sea of battle. Abu Hudhaifah was calling, "O people of 
the Qur'aan, decorate the Qur'aan with your actions," and his sword 
was like a violent hurricane in the army of Musailamah the Liar. And 
Saalim was shouting, "What a bad carrier of the Qur'aan I would be if 
the Muslims were attacked through me." 


Drive into a trap, O Saalim, but yes, you are our best carrier of 
the Qur'aan. 


And Saalim's sword was forceful on the necks of the apostates 
who embarked upon celebrating the jaahiliyah of the Quraish and 
extinguishing the light of Islam. The swords of apostasy fell upon his 
right hand and cut it off, while he was carrying with it the standard of 
the Muhaajiruun after its bearer, Zaid Ibn Al-Khattaab, had fallen. 
When his right hand was cut off, he picked up the standard with his 
left and kept on waving it high while shouting the following noble 
Qur'aanic verses: < And how many of the Prophets have fought, and 
with them large troops of godly people? But they never lost heart 
when adversity befell them in GOD's cause, nor did they weaken, nor 
did they fail. And GOD loves those who show fortitude> (3:146). 


Is not that the most magnificent slogan? That is the one he chose 
on the day of death. 


A group of apostates circled around him, so the hero fell, but his 
spirit kept on repeating in his purified body, until the battle ended 
with the killing of Musailamah the Liar, the defeat of his army, and 
the triumph of the Muslim army. 


When the Muslims were examining their sacrificed and martyrs, 
they found Saalim in the last agony of death. He asked them, "What 
has Abu Hudhaifah done?" They said, "He died a martyr.” He said, 
"Lay me next to him." They said, "He is next to you, O Saalim." He 
had died a martyr in the same place. 


He smiled his last smile and did not speak again. He and his 
companion had realized what they desired. Together they had 
become Muslims. Together they had lived and together they had died 


as martyrs. 


: Oh, the magnificence of fortune and beauty of destiny! And he 

went to Allah, that great believer about whom ‘Umar Ibn Al- 
Khattaab said while he was dying, “If Saalim were alive, I would 
have given him the command after me." 


493 


FAREWELL 


Now, while we bid farewell to the graceful company of the 
Companions of Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (May peace and 
blessings be upon him and upon them all), we may ask ourselves, 
have we given the matter what it deserves? Have we taken into 
account all such great men? 


The answer is, No. We have been honored by their greatness 
through a close examination and have followed a blessed number of 
them during some bright moments, but we were not fortunate to 
accompany all of them. 


Indeed, the sixty men introduced in this book stand for many 
thousands of others of their glorious brethren who saw the Messenger 
(PBUH), lived during his time, believed in him, and struggled with 
him. In the lives of these sixty righteous men we perceive the images 
of all the Companions. We see their faith, their steadfastness, their 
heroism, their sacrifices, and their loyalty. We see the effort they 
exerted and the victory they achieved. We also see the role they 
played in liberating all humanity from the paganism of conscience 
and the loss of destiny ! 


* * * 


These sixty men, then, are a superb and magnificent example 
the significance of which we welcome and contemplate. We see in 
this example the heroes and soldiers of the greatest epoch of human 
struggle in general and of religious struggle in particular. It was an 
epoch when the ancient world was destroyed by the new force of 
truth which came to announce the oneness of Allah and the unity of 
creation. There were no idols or images in the new era, no worshiped 
emperors or czars. There is only One God Who is Allah, while all 
people are as equal as the teeth of a comb. 


* * * 


494 


I desire not to repeat what I have already written about the 
causes that induced that amazing faith which filled the hearts of 


these men. 


Muhammad (PBUH) with his truth, steadfastness, purity, and 
eminence could not but reflect faith of a rare quality on the people 
around him. It was the faith of people who had known him well and 
had seen him in all his perfection and grace, saw his humanity and 
his devotion to Allah, saw his loftiness and modesty, saw all his 
superb qualities and his simplicity, saw him in his strength and his 
compassion. 


They saw him and perceived the nobility of his motives and his 
undeviating and straight method. Therefore, doubt did not prevent 
them at all from believing in him. They did not even make use of their 
right to ask him for a miracle to ascertain his prophethood and his 
mission. 


Every nation has asked its prophet for a miracle in order to 
believe in him, except Muhammad's Companions, the men round the 
Messenger. They never said, "Show us a miracle as proof of your 
truthfulness." This was because Muhammad himself was the miracle! 
Seeking another miracle outside of him, his personality, and his 
principles would have been a kind of naivete such intelligent people 
could not be involved in, especially after their hearts had been filled 
with the guidance of Allah and their perceptions had been 
illuminated with His light. 


Indeed, the faith of that first generation of Muslims bestowed 
upon the whole of humanity — with its different religions, different 
ages and races — a great trust that revived its youth and its 
determination. After all, they were human beings. They lived during 
certain circumstances. They appeared unable to do what they - 
actually did afterwards. Collectively they had not yet achieved all ’ 
the necessary characteristics to form a society. They were scattered, 


495 


discordant, fighting tribes led by inflexible narrow-minded 
individuality. As a political power, they had not achieved anything 
that could be mentioned. As an economic power, they were the 
poorest of people. In number, they were less than other peoples. 


What happened, then, to make these minorities the constructors 
of a new world having wonderful features ? Was it due to the power 
of weapons and the plenitude of armies? But Alexander before them 
and Genghis Khan after them had plenty of weapons and a great 
number of soldiers. Where is Alexander today? Where is Genghis 
Khan? What is left of them and their waves of armies or their 
astounding victories? What is left of all that, in the conscience of life 
and the conscience of mankind? Nothing. 


Therefore, materialistic power in all its aspects was not the 
reason that turned the Companions of the Messenger (PBUH) into 
what we have seen. It was but faith: faith in truth and in what is 
good. Above that, faith in the Lord of truth and good. This is the true 
lesson which was given and is still given to all mankind by 
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, (May Allah be pleased with him 
and his Companions). 


* * * 


When people devote their lives to the cause of truth and 
benefaction, surely darkness turns into light, chaos turns into 
order, weakness turns into strength, property becomes protected, 
humiliation becomes greatness, ignorance becomes knowledge, 
privation becomes plenitude, and all thorns become flowers. That 
was what the Messenger (PBUH) and his Companions did, and that 
was what had been done before by all the messengers and their 
companions of believers. And it is the lesson they left us to learn 
from. 


Since truthfulness and benefaction were the quintessence of the 
role of the Messenger (PBUH) and his Companions, and since true, 
pure, and brave faith was their means and principle, we saw them 


496 


bequeathing the best heritage to humanity. They filled the human 
conscience with vigor, illumination, and integrity of behavior. 


Today, most of the radios of the world openly broadcast verses 
from the Glorious Qur'aan which was to the Messenger (PBUH) and 
his Companions the guide and the light. Most of the radios of the 
world, even the states that have another religion and the states that 
have no religions, most of them start their program with verses from 
the Qur'aan in their broadcasts in Arabic. In all the spots of the 
earth, among Muslims and Christians, among Jews, Hindus, and 
Buddhists, and in the territories of states that have no religion, the 
lofty minarets are erected to repeat from their top the same words 
teverberated through the voice of the muezzin of the Messenger 
(PBUH) 1400 years ago! 


Allah is the Greatest, Allah is the Greatest 

I bear witness that there is no god but Allah 

I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of 
Allah 

Come to the Prayer 

Come to success 


Everywhere on earth the Qur'aan of that religion is recited, 
everywhere on earth the mosques are filled, and everywhere on earth 
its principles are announced. 


+ * * 


What power has given Islam such eternity? It is the same power 
we witnessed before that gave this religion and its men a superb and 
extraordinary power to change the world and to change the people, 
values, and destinies in it. It is the power of faith in truth and 
benefaction. Above all, it is the belief in the Lord of truth and 
benefaction, in the Messenger, and in all other messengers who came 
before and devoted their lives to truth and benefaction, who gave 
everything and took nothing for themselves. 


+ * * 


497 


There remains one word to be said in this conclusion. It is a 
question that inevitably occurs to the mind after witnessing such 
illuminating scenes such as we beheld in these 60 men of the 
Messenger's Companions. The question is, "How could dispute and 
disagreement ruin the strong ties between the rightly guided brothers, 
and how could the civil war that broke out between “Aliy's 
supporters and those of Mu*aawiyah — some incidents of which we 
have witnessed throughout this book — overcome their splendid 
brotherhood?" 


In order to give an answer to this question, we have to go back 
to the virtue of faith in these Companions, and then to other 
historical factors as well. Indeed, their true, clear, and decisive faith 
had made them follow the same path. To them, truth had but one 
face which they recognized and followed. It did not have multiple 
and assumed faces to let some waver among them according to 
their dispositions and interests. While the Messenger (PBUH) was 
living among them, guidance to what is true and right —a matter in 
which people differed — was an easy matter. Revelation or the 
Messenger, or both of them, usually clarified every obscure or 
unintelligible matter. 


When the Messenger (PBUH) passed away, they never differed 
in what had been clarified and explained by Allah's revelation or 
through Muhammad's interpretation. However, when ~Uthmaan 
(May Allah be pleased with him) was killed, his murder had been 
preceded and accompanied with pernicious commotion which shook 
all Islamic nations at that time. As a consequence of that terrible 
occurrence, the dispute widened. It was inevitable for each of the 
Companions according to his attitude to choose one of the multiple 
views. 


Their way of choosing, like their way of believing, was 
characterized by clarity and decisiveness. There was no hesitation or 
hypocrisy. Those who were convinced of Imam “Aliy's point of view 
chose his side, and those convinced that the two parties were wrong 
chose a third side in which they urged the two disputing parties to 


498 


renounce their differences. When the die was cast, they chose to be 
neutral and abandoned the dispute. 


The above concerns the Companions, the early believers in Islam 
who lived at the time of the Messenger (PBUH) and fought with him 
the forces of polytheism and darkness. However, these Companions 
did not represent by themselves the "center of gravity " in the Islamic 
state at the time of the dispute between ~Aliy and Mu‘aawiyah. This 
is because the state at that time had expanded tremendously, and a 
new power emerged and started to take part in the events and direct 
them. The best evidence for this is that the conspiracy to claim the 
life of Caliph “Uthmaan and the agents assigned to carry it out came 
from outside Al-Madiinah, rather from outside the whole Arab 
Peninsula. They came from some distant Islamic countries. 


This new power played a role which the first Companions 
could not repel. The role was serious and effective in turning the 
dispute between “Aliy and Mu*aawiyah into warfare. This reached 
the extent that the people of Syria siding with Mu‘aawiyah and the 
people of Iraq siding with “Aliy, became the real protagonists in that 
war. Even in the final analysis, the war was not between two Islamic 
camps as much as it was between two regional ones: the Syrians on 
one side and Iraqis on the other ! 


There was a third force which should not be ignored, an evil 
force which lay waiting for Islam since sovereignty was taken from its 
hand and leveled to the dust. That was the power represented in the 
remains of Persia and some few who continued to perpetuate their 
schemes against Islam through their many agents who infiltrated 
Islam, pretending to embrace it. Some of them were able to cause a 
lot of damage and destruction in the ranks of Muslims, which the two 
defeated empires could not do. 


* * * 


This is a rapid look at the circumstances of that critical 
situation which the Companions and Islam as a whole passed 
through. However, we should not ignore another fact, which is that 


499 


each of the leaders of the two fighting camps did not think at all that 
the matter would develop to that terrible degree. Iman “Aliy and his 
followers saw their advance towards Syria as merely a scare tactic 
and thought that Mu*aawiyah would soon awaken to realize the 
power of the state and would respect and obey it. 


On the other hand, Muaawiyah and his followers believed that 
Imam *Aliy was merely testing their strength and their readiness. If 
he found they were strong and well equipped, he would seek a 
reconciliation through another means. Yet, the matter developed ina 
strange and unusual way. This sudden and strange development 
discloses the hidden forces working in each camp to turn the dispute 
into warfare. 


Let us now end our talk about this war with this incident. Az- 
Zubair (May Allah be pleased with him) was fighting in the ranks of 
Mu‘aawiyah, but at the end of the battle he realized his mistake in 
joining the war, and so he withdraw. However, some fighters 
followed him and stabbed him to death while he was praying. The 
killer robbed Az-Zubair of his sword and ran to Imam “Aliy, desiring 
to tell him the good news of the murder of Az-Zubair and to lay in his 
hands the sword he had used in fighting with Mu‘aawiyah against 
~Aliy. He came to the Imam's door asking for permission. When 
“Aliy learned of the matter he shouted a command to dismiss the 
killer, saying, "Give the good tidings to the killer of Ibn Sufiyah that he 
will be cast in hell-fire." By Ibn Sufiyah, he meant Az-Zubair (May 
Allah be pleased with him). He ordered further to have Az-Zubair's 
sword taken from the killer and brought to him. 


When “Aliy saw the sword, he kept kissing it. He was crying 
and saying, "A sword whose owner had so many times removed the 
distress from the Messenger of Allah." 


* * * 


500 


This remarkable and great scene bestows upon the above- 
mentioned disagreement and its painful development much calmness 
and tranquility. It fills us with much understanding and appreciation 
when we remember it. 


Now we bid farewell to those men with whom we lived a 
happy and blissful time on the pages of this book. We thank Allah 
for His blessings, hoping to have more blessing, compassion, and 
good health from Almighty Allah. 


With awe and reverence, we say to our eminent teacher, the last 
of the Messengers, "May peace and the mercy of Allah and His 
blessings be upon you. May Allah grant you the best reward for the 
teachings you gave and for your guidance." And with a renewed, 
overflowing yearning, we say to his blessed Companions, "Righteous 
men, farewell!" 


But, when were they really absent from our lives to bid them 
farewell? Let our greeting to them be, "Peace". Peace we extended at 
the beginning with awe and reverence, and peace is extended at the 
end with awe and reverence. 


501 


WOMEN AROUND THE 
MESSENGER 


VOLUME TWO 


J gust) gm ¢ Lei 


Compiled and translated by: 
Dr. Abdel-Hamid Eliwa 
Al-Azhar University 


502 


Translator's Postscript 


One of the major themes that prevails the western mind is 
that Islam treats women as mere things. She has no right to take 
part in social, political or economic life. She may rather have no 
right to go outdoors. 


However, Islam still has so much to offer today's woman: 
dignity, respect, and protection in all walks of life. A woman in 
Islam is as responsible as a man for populating the earth. Both of 
them have to work for the good of humanity. They will be 
questioned before the hands of Allah concerning that great role, let 
alone the responsibility of disseminating the word of Allah. 


Both husband and wife have equal important role in the 
family. These roles according to Islam, cannot be identical or the 
same but reciprocal and complementary. The wife-mother's role 
which is bringing up the children and providing love, affection and 
warm gentle care for her family members, complements that of the 
husband who is breadwinner of the family and who provides 
protection from the external world. In Islam, husband-wife 
relationship 1s governed by mutual understanding and mutual 
consultation over important problems. The wife in a Muslim family 
should be a tremendous source of strength to the husband in facing 
the hardships of life. The husband in turn should always be the firm 
shield that protects the wife from the hazards of life. 


These examples which we have dicussed in this book are 
just some examples of ideal Muslim women in the past. There are 
also many examples, who belong to the modern world, but they are 
beyond the subject matter of the book: The Early Muslim Women. 


503 


Introduction 


Praise be ro Allah and peace and blessings be upon the 
Messenger of Allah, his household, his companions and those who 
follow his guidance . 


A woman is a half of humankind and bears the other half. 
Thus, she is the whole world. Among the most wonderful mysteries 
of our nature is that of sex. The unregenerate male is apt in the pride 
of his physical strength, to forget the all-important part, which the 
female plays in his very existence, and in all the social relationships 
that arise in our collective human lives. The mother that bore us 
must ever have our reverence. Sex, which governs so much of our 
physical life, and has so much influence on our emotional and higher 
nature, deserves -not our fear, or our contempt or our amused 
indulgence, but -our reverence in the highest sense of the term. 


One of the effective ways that magnify the belief in one’s heart 
is to highlight some stories of the early believers. Such stories 
explain the seeming contradictions of life, the enduring nature of 
virtue in a world full of flux and change and the marvellous working 
of Allah’s eternal purpose in His plan as unfolded to us on the wide 
canvas of history. 


When one looks at the women, who will be dicussed, however 
those who risked their lives in Jihad against the enemies of Allah and 
those who presented their sons and all what they had for the cause of 
Allah, an explanation of their motivations that downplays faith in 
Allah and His Messenger (pbuh) must surely need a great deal more 
to be convincing than this type of brief detail. However, hereunder 
there are some snapshots of their lives that may highlight the 
development of their chasracters. 


504 


The Mother 
of the Mankind 


505 


Hawwa' 


She is the mother of mankind. She is created from one of Adam's 
ribs. Allah the Almighty says, 


ott oe Sipe AOE hen Veo eee EE ee ee Bere 
wal GS dil Ga Ye be ile) ee oe ae 
acted are 


Seis tee fe teh wt vot . 
EAE g Gb we Gs GE pax ok bg Bale Gul des 

E> bee ct, Be, 4-4, <7 ones pe ghee ale ster E xe 
«& a 3 é 5 4 \ ov: eee So 
6D Sgn Sb BY ALY AU 5 5 ai NS 


¢He created you (all) from a single person: then 


created of like nature, his mate » 
(Az-Zumar: 6) 


It was after Adam had been created the angels were asked to 
prostrate to him, for by Allah's grace, his status had actually been 
raised higher. All of the angels prostrated save Iblis (Satan) who in 
turn was expelled from the Garden awing to his rebelliousness. 
Adam and his wife, Hawwa' were placed in the Garden of comfort 
and bless, but it was Allah's plan to give him a limited faculty of 
choice. All that he was forbidden to do was to approach the Tree, but 
he succumbed to Satan's suggestions. 


Adam and Hawwa' were innocent in matters material as well as 
spiritual. They knew no evil. But the faculty of choice, which was 
given to them and which raised them above the angels, also implied 
that they has the capacity of evil, which by the training of their own 
will, they were to reject. They were warned of the danger. When 
they fell, they realized the evil. They were (as we are) still given the 
chance in this life on a lower plane, to make good end recover the 
lost status of innocence and bliss. 

Adam and Hawwa' were commanded to inhabit the earth. They 


were very sad Both of them repented and Allah accepted their 
repentance because it was sincere. They were told by Allah that the 


506 


earth is their original abode where they would live and die and be 
resurrected from on the Day of Judgement. Allah the Almighty said, 


- sere 


cre :UteMy é@) Ge Wed Sg y5 455 Sy US JS 


Therein shall ye live, and therein shall ye die: but 
from it shall ye be taken out (at last). 
(AL-A'raf: 25) 
Some people claim that Hawwa' is the real reason why mankind 
does not dwell in Paradise because she asked Adam to eat from the tree. 


They believe that if it were not for this sin, we would have 
continued to live there. This is undoubtedly a naive view. When Allah 
the Almighty willed the creation of Adam He told the angels, 


&&) Os aps Ud ab & Ll Lae\ AS; Caste, ios | igas” GAG 
ph 4 25 43 


@/ will create a vicegerent on earth. J 
(al-Baqarah: 39) 


He did not say, “I will create a vicegerent on Paradise." Allah the 
High Exalted knew that Adam and Hawwa' would eat from the Tree 
and descend on earth. He knew that Satan would rob them of innocence. 
The knowledge they learned was to become essential for their life on 
earth. 


From the very early down of life on earth, Satan tried to tempt our 
parents (and all of us) in order that he might manage to keep them away 
from the path of Allah. Thus it is an ongoing war and we should fight 
against Satan to win Paradise. 


507 


The Mothers 
of the Prophets 


508 


Sara 


She was the only woman of Ibrahim's people to believe in 
Allah. She, afterwards, became his wife. She stood by her husband 
all the time when calling his people to Allah. 


When Ibrahim realized that no one other than his wife and his 
nephew, Lut was going to believe in his call, he decided to 
immigrate, to a city called Ur and another called Haran and then 
departed for Palestine with them. After Palestine, Ibrahim arrived in 


Egypt. 


His wife, Sara was barren. The pharaoh of Egypt, during her 
stay in Egypt, presented her a slave girl to serve her. Ibrahim was 
getting old and he had had no son by her. Sara was past the age of 
childbearing as well. Sara thought about how she and Ibrahim were 
lonely, for she was barren. She thought that Ibrahim should take her 
slave girl, Hajar as a wife. Sara let her husband Ibrahim marry Hajar, 
Then Hajar gave birth to Isma ‘il, Ibrahim's first son. 


One day, Ibrahim received a group of strange guests. He chose 
a fat calf and gave orders for it to be slaughtered. 


Ibrahim then invited his guests to eat and he let his wife serve 
them a gesture of welcome and hospitality. He received them with a 
salutation of peace, and immediately placed before them a 
sumptuous meal of roasted calf. The strangers were embarrassed. 
They were angles and did not eat. The angels gave Sara glad tidings 
of Ishaq. She could hardly believe the news. The news seemed to her 
too good to be true. She came froward, clamoured, struck her 
forehead with her hands, indicative of her amusement and incredulity 
as "a barren old woman." Allah the Almighty says, 


509 


wer 


SEINE as gs I poset Los 9 el To ep 
jen, (GS SS kG Mot OH 5 4 GS 
JE SG Bee Uh ah Ges SE GD) Gas GL I os 
ASB AS GSA Ot @ 23 tHe Gy 


% 7 co, © 7 Coe bene ater 
ive ve 39] 66) Le Le M4 Cl dl Se AS; 


éThere came our Messenger to Ibrahim with glad 
tidings. They said, "peace!" He answered, "Peace!" 
and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf. 
But when he saw their hands not reaching towards 
the (meal), he felt some mistrust of them, and 
conceived a fear of them. They said: "Fear not: We 
have been sent against the people of Lut.” And his 
wife was standing (there), and she laughed: But We 
gave her glad tidings of Isaac, and after him, of 
Jacob. She said: "Alas form me! Shall I bear a 
child. seeing I am an old woman, and my husband 
here is an old man? That would indeed be a 
wonderful thing!" They said: "Dost thou wonder at 
Allah's decree? The grace of Allah and His 
blessings on you, O ye people of the house! For He 


is indeed Worthy of all Praise, Full of all Glory!» 
(Hud: 70-73) 


Hajar 


‘She was an Egyptian slave girl who was given to Sara, Ibrahim's 
wife as a present. Because Sara was barren, She prefered to give 
[brahim that girl in marriage so that she might bless him with a child. 
As years passed, Hajar gave birth to a son. Sara grew jealous and 
furious. She thought that she became inferior and that Hajar boasted 
over her. Therefore, she started to blame her husband by saying, "You 
disliked me after she had become pregnant!" He replied, "She is just 
your slave girl and you can do whatever you want." ! 


However, Sara kept patient until Hajar gave birth to a boy. At 
that time, she became jealous. She swore not to live with that slave 
girl together. 


Accordingly, Ibrahim took Hajar and the baby and went 
southward. They arrived at Makka, a barren town, where the relics of 
Allah's Sacred House were still there. This was the first House in which 
Allah was worshipped. There were just a few nomad people who would 
stay wherever they found water or pasture. 


Ibrahim left his wife and his son there with a small amount of food 
and water. Then, he turned around and walked away. His wife hurried 
after him saying: "Where are you going, Ibrahim, leaving us in this 
barren desert?" 


Ibrahim did not answer her and went on walking. She repeated 
what she said but he remained silent. Eventually, she realized that he 
did not do this of his own accord. She asked-him, "Did Allah command 
you to do so?" Ibrahim replied, "Yes." She, at once, said, "We are not 
going to be lost since Allah, who has commanded you is with us." 


Ibrahim walked until he was hidden from them by a mountain. 
There he raised his hand skyward and started praying to Allah, 


‘Qouted from the bible 


511 


‘or to oe wos ae i ee ’ gm Se ee 
C5 SAN Ak Le gb wd pe ok GS \ Bh Ee 
- eis (eae 2a a2 e £08 epee 24 ts 
BOG aL wee LOT Sh tsi Jaeb St 


Lm 7 sree Pe rt 7 
VV spel yl] 4G) USS 4b) of 


éO Our Lord! I have made some of my offspring 
to dwell in a valley without cultivation, by the 
sacred House; in order, O our Lord! That they 
may establish regular prayer: so fill the hearts of 
some among men with love towards them, and 
feed them with fruits; so that they may give 
thanks.» 
(Ibrahim: 37) 


Ibrahim left his wife and his son in the desert and went home to go 
on calling people to Allah. Hajar nursed her son, Ismail and felt 
thirthy. The sun was scorching hot and invited thirst. After a period of 
time, all what she had of water was finished. The mother's milk was 
dry, and both mother and son were thirst. Moreover, the food was 
finished and the situation seemed very difficult and critical. 


Isma il began to cry out of thirst, so his mother left him to search 
for water. She walked hurriedly until she reached a hill called "Safa" 
She climbed the hill and put her hands on her forehead to protect her 
eyes from the sun, narrowing her eyes she looked for a well, a man, a 
caravan or anything else. However, there was nothing to be seen. 


She came down from Safa hurriedly until she reached the valley 
where she kept searching. Then she came upon a hill called "Marwa" 
She climbed it and looked around to see if anybody was in view. 
Unfortunately, there was nobody at her sight She returned to her baby 
who was about to die out of thirst. She had nothing to do but to return 
again to the Safa Hill. From there, she hurried to Marwa Hill. 


All her endeavors were of no avail. She went to and fro between 
the two hills seven times. For this reason, pilgrims walked between Safa 


512 


and Marwa seven time, commemorating the memory of Hajar and the 
Prophet Isma‘‘il. 


Hajar returned after the seventh time tired and exhausted to find 
the water gushing from beneath Islam‘i's feet. Water overflowed and 
the life of the mother and child were saved. The mother and child were 
saved. The mother cupped her hand and filled it with water as she gave 
thanks to Allah. 


Afterwards, life began to thrive in this area Caravans began to 
settle around the water which overflowed from Zamzam. 


At that time, a caravan was passing westward towards Syria. 
When they noticed some flocks of birds flying over Makka, they 
realized that there must be water. 


Instantly they went to Hajar and asked her permission to live 
beside her. Many people were attracted by that new well of water and 
the place began to be inhabited by people. 


513 


Umm Musa 


There was a tyrant Pharaoh in Egypt. He and his clique were 
intoxicated with pride of race and pride of material civilization, and 
grievously oppressed the Israelites. He saw an odious dream. He mvited 
the soothsayers to interpret his dream. They told him that one of Israel's 
sons would dethrone the pharaoh of Egypt. 


Pharaoh in fear decreed that all male sons born to his Israelite 
subjects should be killed, and the femals kept alive for the pleasure of 
the Egyptians. 


After pharaoh carried out his new policy he found out that to 
kill all male sons of Israelites might lead to the annihilation of 
Israelites as a whole. 


As a result he might lose the output of those who worked for him, 
those who he enslaved, and their women whom he exploited. Therefore, 
he issued a command that all males should be slaughtered every other year. 


Musa was born in the year in which males were to be slain. Musa's 
mother was afraid he would be slain. The Egyptian midwives had 
orders to kill male babies of Israelites. Musa was saved from them, and 
his mother nursed the infant at her breast herself. 


But when the danger of discovery was imminent, she put him into a 
chest or basket, and floated him on the river Nile. Allah the Almighty said, 


ae ora Bis ae eo ae BOR wer 
5H 3 gals ok os 8 Se Fey 3d] Coa 


~, 6 Bye ae “es 


4Q ACS Ss, thes wh | BAG GEG 


oa 


«So we sent this inspiration to the mother of 
Moses: "Suckle (thy child), but when thou hast fear 
about him, cast him into the river, but fear not nor 
grieve: For We shall restore him to thee, and We 


shall make him one of Our Messenger.) 
(AI-Qasas: 7) 


514 


No sooner was the Divine revelation completed than Musa's 
mother obeyed this sacred and wise call. Her motherly heart was filled 
with pain as she threw her son into the river Nile. However, she knew 
that Allah was much more merciful to her baby than she was. 


Barely did she cast Musa into the Nile than she felt that she had 
cast her heart as well. Here heart became broken and consumed by 
grief. Allah the Almighty said, 


Gos ASS og 0S Se BS st 8 Ep 
gare (© atl & Ss GE & 


And the heart of the mother of Moses became 
void: She was going almost to disclose his (case), 

had we not strengthened her heart with faith), so 

that she might remain a (firm) believer. ? 

(Al-Qasa: 10) 

The mother's heart felt the gaping void at parting from her son; but 
her faith in Allah's providence kept her from betraying herself. All what 
she did was to ask her daughter, Musa's sister to pursue calmly the chest. 

Amazingly, the waves delivered the chest to pharaoh's palace. 
When the ladies of pharaoh's wife saw the chest, they carried it to her. 


Musa was a darling to look at, and pharaoh had apparently no son, but 
only a daughter. Pharaoh's wife loved the baby as Allah willed. Allah 


the almighty said, 


Ure a gh Sogn geia ore th, ah eel 
Jt ky lie G8 Y ly d xe L638 es Si Carey 
[8 2 eneally &@ Cy Aly dae 


¢The wife of pharaoh said, "Here is) a Joy of the 
eye, for me and for me and for thee: Slay him not. 
If may be that he will be of use to us, or we may 
adopt him as a son.' And they perceived not (what 


they were doing)! 3 
(Al-Qasa: 9) 


515 


This was the plan of providence : that the wicked might cast a net 
round themselves by fostering the man who was to bring them to naught 
and be the instrument of their punishment, or (looking at it from the 
other side) that Musa Might learn all the wisdom of the Egyptians in 
order to expose all that was hollow and wicked in it. 


Allah the Almighty said, 


ia 
Are 


i Cis Cy 65 Se ees iss J aap 
A ‘an Aa, “pes 7 
Ue 6G) Seb Bee KAspts 


éThen, the people of pharaoh picked him up) from 

the river: (It was intended) that (Moses) should be 

to them an adversary and a cause of sorrow: for 

Pharaoh and Haman and (all) their hosts were men 

of sin.» 

(Al-Qasa: 8) 

In all life providence so orders things, that Evil is defeated by its 
own weapons. Not only is it defeated, but it actually, though 
unwittingly, advances the cause of Good! 


No sooner did pharaoh respond to his wife than he saw her face 
became radiant with joy. Pharaoh brought him nurse but he refused. 
Many nurses were brought in and Musa still rejected each one of them. 
Pharaoh's wife began to weep because of Musa's cries. She did not 
know what she could do. 


All of sudden, Musa's sister went calmly and softly and heard the 
entire story she went to pharaoh's guards and said, 


ob EN fs Se Go whl ab Ga @ 
[VY saul] GD his J ds ad BUSS 
Shall I point out to you the people of a house that 
will nourish and bring him up for you and take 
care of him? 

(Al-Qasas: 12) 


516 


In this way, Musa was restored to his mother Musa got the benefit 
of his mother's milk as well as the prestige and the opportunities of 
being brought up in the royal family. In addition, There was the comfort 
of his mother. Allah Almighty said, 


“ oA ee oie BS 4 


Le Fs j ieee: 
au) 365 adh (ees Ae ere 5 Kenic Bb 24a) ay 453555 
[YY :enadly &@) < Sey Y mel j ne 


«Thus did We restore him to his mother, that her 
eye might be comforted, that she might not grieve, 
and that she might know that the promise of Allah 


is true: but most of them do not know. P 
(Al-Qasas: 13) 


517 


Maryam 


She is Maryam bint ‘Imran, the daughter of the priest “Imran and 
his wife Hanna, who when pregnant with Maryam, vowed to dedicate 
the child she bore to the service of the Holy Temple in Jerusalem, and 
at her birth accordingly named her Maryam, meaning "servant of her 
Lord." Allah the Almighty said, 


40 4 wee Ste 4 ore < te Cle ON 
Be eye So oe eee 
“7g Fra ap s a4 erege 44g Ex <4 


= SEI, 4% Pie Soe eer 
ne to ie Jy oe gol ght % 


«Behold! Wife of 'Imran said: "O my Lord! I do 
dedicate into thee what is in my womb for thy 
special service: So accept this of me: for thou 
hearest and knowest all things." When she was 
delivered, she said: "O my Lord Behold! I am 
delivered of a female child!" And Allah knew best 
what she brought forth "And is not the male like the 
female. I have named her Mary, and I commend 

her and her offspring to they protection from Satan 

the Rejected. - 

(Al-Imran: 35-36) 

The mother of Maryam expected a male child. Was she 
disappointed that it was a female child? No, for she had Faith, and she 
knew that Allah's Fate was better than any wishes of hers. Maryam was no 
ordinary girl: only Allah knew what it was that her mother brought forth. 


Maryam grew under Allah's special protection. Her sustenance, 
under which we may include both her physical needs and her spiritual 
food, came from Allah, and her growth was indeed a ‘goodly growth". 


518 


Some aprocryphal Christian writings say that she was brought up in the 
Temple to the age of twelve like a dove, and that she was fed by angels. 


The purest of womankind, she was a great-faithed one, and 
miraculously conceived the Prophet ‘Isa (pbuh). Allah the Almighty said, 


2 Be aye eee eye Gye ep eae sone POE AE on AP Bae 9 gre 

Cy fe Wb, bs suki al Gf GS Aad che ony 
a PLAIN Lig te. 

[€¥ cole Jl 6) <pici 


éBehold the angels said: "O Mary! Allah hath 
chosen thee and purified thee chosen thee above 
the women of all nations.» 
(Al-Imran: 42) 
Mary the mother of Jesus was unique, in that she gave birth to a 
son by a special miracle, without the intervention of the customary 


physical means. This of course does not mean that she was more than 
human, any more than that her son was more than human. 


Betng chosen as the purest of womankind, she was told that she 
would beget a child without wedlock. Maryam was still a virgin. No 


human had touched her, nor was she married or engaged. Therefore she 
was stunned and wonered saying, 


4 Ge HS TS ih Bh ME EG SI lp 
[Ys te] 


éShe said: How shall I have a son, seeing that no 
man has touched me, and I am not unchaste?" » 
(Maryam: 20) 
She at once heard the Divine reply, 


(He said: "So (it will be): Thy Lord saith, 'That is 
easy for Me: and (We wish) to appoint him as a 
Sign unto men and a mercy from Us": It is a matter 


(So) decreed. } 


519 


Allah had destined her to be the mother of the Prophet ‘Isa 
(Jesus Christ) in a miraculous way. 


Allah's creation is not dependent on time, or instruments or 
means, or any conditions whatsoever. Existence waits on His Will, 
or plan, or Intention. The moment He wills a thing it becomes His 
Word or command, and the thing forthwith comes into existence. 


Allah created Adam without a father and mother. There was no 
man or woman before Adam. Hawwa' was created after Adam and 
she was created from a male without a female parties. 


Both Maryam and her son, ‘Isa were unfortunately later taken 
as objects of worship by some sects of Christians because of the 
strangeness of ‘Isa's birth without a father, though as commentators 
point out, by such reasoning the Prophet Adam (pbuh) might better 
deserve to be worshipped, since he had neither father nor mother. 


The amazement of the people knew no bounds. In any case they 
were ready to think the worst of her, as she had disappeared from her 
kin for some time. But now she came, shamelessly parading a babe 
in her arms! How she had disgraced the house of Aaron, the fountain 
of priesthood! The people then reminded her of her high lineage and 
the unexceptionable morals of her father and mother. How, they said, 
she had fallen, and disgraced the name of her progentors! 


What could Maryam do? How could she explain? Would they, 
in their censorious mood, accept her explanation? All she could do 
was to point to the child, who, she knew, was no ordinary child. And 
the child came to her rescue. By a miracle he spoke, defended his 
mother, and preached to an unbelieving audience. Allah the 
Almighty said, 


520 


ae 


see emer cper NIr GANS Vo Re eet 


wie ae parecer fytr 2” 47 Bee tere LEX Lr FLL 
sy) sal sresly cee, cpl Bsc ghers (rs) bs cghens 


2 ae ie eee anne tee Cr» f- 2 5. 
4) Gok che Goth i GE tho 


[YY -YV sey] 


CA length she brought the (babe) to her people, 
carrying him (in her arms), they said: "O Mary! 
Truly a strange thing Has thou brought! "O sister 
of Aaron! Thy father was not a man of evil nor thy 
mother a woman unchaste!" But she pointed to the 
babe. They said: 'How can we talk to one who is a 
child in the cradle?” He said: "I am indeed a 
servant of Allah: He lath given me Revelation and 
made me a Prophet: And He hath made me Blessed 
where so ever I be, and hath enjoined on me prayer 
and Zakat as long as I live; "He hath made me) 
kind to my mother, and not over bearing or 
unblest; "So peace is on me the day I was born, the 
day that I die, and the day that I shall be raised up 


to life (again)!" » 
(Maryam: 27: 33). 


521 


The Prophet's Wives 


522 


Khadija Bint Khuwailid 


She was the best of womankind in her lifetime. She was the 
daughter of Khuwailid Ibn Asad Ibn ‘Abdu-l-Uzza Ibn Qusayy Ibn 
Kilab. She was from the tribe of Quraish and of Bani Asad and was 
called the chaste woman. She was bom in a house of glory and 
leadership fifteen years before the Year of the Elephant and brought up 
in an honorable house. She was a rational and venerable woman. She 
was famous for her strictness, reason and decency. Because of this, she 
was respected and desired by the elite of her tribe. 


She got married to Abu Halah Ibn Zararah of Tamimi-tribe and 
gave birth to Halah and Hind After the death of Abu Halah, she 
married “Ateeq Ibn ‘A‘iz Ibn ‘Abdullah who was from the tribe of Bani 
Makhzum. They stayed together for a period of time before separation. 


Then, she refused many proposals of marriage made by venerable 
men. She devoted her life for her children and towards managing her trade. 
She was wealthy and used to hire men to manage her trade as partners. 


Being informed of the Prophet Muhammad's truthfulness, integrity 
and good manners before his Messengership, she entrusted him to run 
her trade accompanied by her slave Maysarah in ash-Sham (Syria) and 
promised to pay to him more than to others. The Prophet agreed and 
travelled with Khadia’s slave. He achieved great gains by Allah's 
willing. Khadija was quite pleased with his achievements. But what 
pleased and gained her admiration even more was Muhammad himself. 


She started to think of him and found herself attracted to 
Muhammad emotionally. She had never felt such emotion before. But 
she started to wonder: Would he accept her proposal since she was forty 
years and he was only twenty-five? How could she face those whom 
she refused of the masters of Quraish before? 


Meanwhile, her friend, Nafisa Bint Munabbih, entered and started 
to talk with her until she made her disclose what perplexed her. Then 
she comforted her and reminded her of his good character, lineage, 
wealth and grace over all those venerable men who sought to marry her. 


523 


No sooner did Nafisa leave Khadija than she (Nafisa) went to 
Muhammad. She intuitively asked him, "Why did you not marry, 
Muhammad?" He answered, "I cannot afford marriage." She smiled and 
said, "If there is anyone who could be elligible would you agree?" He 
asked, "Who is she?" She said instantly, “Khadija Bint Khuwailid." He 
said, "I would agree if she did." 


Nafisa instantly went to Khadija to tell her the good news. On the 
other hand, Muhammad told his uncles about his wish to marry 
Khadija. Then, Abu Talib, Hamza and others went to Khadya's uncle, 
Amr Ibn Asad and betrothed his niece and offered him the dowry. 


When marriage was concluded, many animals were slaughtered 
and distributed among the poor. They held the wedding party in 
Khadija's house. Halima as-Sa’diyyah who suckled Muhammad was 
among the audience. Khadija offered her forty sheep as a gift to the one 
who suckled her beloved husband, Muhammad. 


When Khadija became Muhammad's wife, she set greatest 
examples in loving her husband and all what he desired. For 
example, she granted Zayd Ibn Haritha to Muhammad, when she felt 
that he loved him. 


Likewise, she pleasantly accepted Ali Ibn Abu Talib as a member 
of her house due to Muhammad's wish. Allah showered incessant favors 
upon such happy union. He blessed them with boys and girls: al-Qasim, 
" Abdullha, Zaynab, Rugqayyah, Umm Kulthum and Fatima. 


Muhammed was inclined, as Allah willed, to worship in solitude. 
He kept on worshipping Allah in this manner in a cave on Mount Hira’ 
for a month every year. He used to stay there for some days living on 
little provision away from the vain talk and the amusement of the 
people of Makka who worshipped idols. 


Although Khadija could not endure to be away from Muhammad, 
she prefered to keep silent and not to ask him what he was doing there 
so as not to disturb him. She did her best in order to look after him and 
to let him live peacefully at home. When going to the cave, she kept 
watching him and then sent whosoever could guard him without 
disturbing him. 


524 


The Messenger of Allah kept doing that for a period of time. Then 
came Jibreel (peace be upon him) with Allah's bless while Muhammad 
was in Hira’ in Ramadan. Having received Allah's revelation, he went 
home scared, pale and trembling. He said, "cover me, cover me." After 
she knew what had happened, he said to her, "I am scared, Khadija" 
This rational wife replied, "May Allah look after us, Abul-Qasim, what 
good news, my cousin. So be steadfast. By Whom in Whose hand is 
Khadija's soul I think that you are the Prophet of this nation. By Allah, 
Allah will never make you lose. You keep good terms with your 
relatives, are truthful, help the weak, are a good host to your guests and 
help the afflicted." 


Such encouragement comforted the Prophet's heart. She then went 
to her cousm Warqa Ibn Nawfal to tell him what had happened to 
Muhammad (pbuh). Accordingly, Waraga proclaimed, 


"Holy is He, Holy is He, by whom in whose hand is Waraqa's soul if you 
are truthful, Khadija, it is the great angel who came to Musa and ‘Isa. Surely, 
he is the Prophet of this nation. Would you tell him to be steadfast." 


Afterwards, the wife went aforetime to please her husband with 
the good tiding. Then, she brought him to her cousin, Waraqa to listen 
to him together. When Waragqa watched the Prophet approaching, he 
shouted, "By whom in whose hand is my soul, you are, the Prophet of 
this nation. You will be rejected, hurt, expelled, fought. Had I lived 
until such day, I would have supported you. Then he kissed his head." 


Muhammad asked, "Would they expel me? Waraqa replied, "Yes, 
None has claimed what you claim without being fought. I would like to 
live until such day." Then Waraq died soon after. 


The Prophet was pleased upon hearing Waraqa's prophecy. He 
realised what his mission to his people was to be and this was Allah's 
law conceming His Prophets and all callers to Him. Therefore, no 
matter how severe sufferings or persecution were he was ready to meet. 


Khadija was the first to believe in Allah and His Messenger and to 
embrace Islam. This faithful and loving wife supported her husband, the 
Prophet (pbuh), and helped him endure the most severe kinds of torture 
and persecution. Then, she relieved him when he was hurt or rejected. 
When they called him a liar, she alone remained true. Then the Qur'anic 
verses were revealed: 


525 


Bs © as is © & &5 @ vst 3 @D Bi Ke Sb 
(OQ 4 ay @ 5 BS @ wt 


(V -) opalh 


€O thou wrapped up (in a mantle)! Arise and 

deliver thy warning! And thy Lord do thou 

magnify! And the garments keep free from stain! 

And all abomination shun! Nor expect, in giving, 

any increase (for thyself)! But, for thy Lord's 

(cause) be patient and constant! P 

(Al-Muddathir: 1-7) 

Henceforth, the noble, Prophet started a new life, full of blessings 
and hardships. He told his wife that the time of sleep and comfort was 
over. Khadija, then, began to summon people to Islam beside her 
husband. The first fruits of their work were her slave Zayd and her four 
daughters (may Allah be pleased with them all). 

Afterwards, the Muslims suffered many different kinds of 
chastisement. But khadija was as steadfast as a mountain. She put 
before her eyes Allah's statement: 


che ene teh de thes Fe 7 mag eR} 
(@) ope y mes fale pres ol By ov Ql eel Zip 
5 Y yp Sos] 


€Alif Lam. Meem. Do men think that they will be 

left alone on saying, 'we believe’, and that they will 

not be tested? » 

(Al-Ankabut: 1-2) 

When Allah took the soul of her two young sons: al-Qasim and 
‘Abdullah she kept patient. She also saw the first martyered woman in 
Islam (Sumayyah) when she suffered the deathly trials at the hands of 
the tyrants. 


526 


She bid farewell to her daughter, Ruqayyah when migrating to 
Abyssinia with her husband, Uthman ibn 'Affan, to escape the torture of 
Quraish and to preserve her belief. 

She witnessed and lived in all hard times, full of hardships and 


struggle without being desperate. She, all the time, kept before her eyes 
Allah's saying: 


Ee 
( 

ie 
& 
ca 


tt4A 2 fe | vee? Ae,» To, 4 
pal Goal Ge Cath eat eel a < 


[YAN obs SH 


€Ye shall certainly be tried and tested in your 

possessions and in yourselves; and ye shall 

certainly hear much that will grieve you, from 

those who received the Book before you and from 

those who worship partners partiently, and guard 

against evil, then that indeed is a matter of great 

resolution. » 

(Al- Imran: 186) 

Before all of this, she witnessed her truthful and kind husband 
suffering several types of trials while summoning to Allah. However, he 
kept patient seeking Allah's reward. The more trials, the more patience 
and steadfastness. He refused all luring offers when the bidders tried to 
entice him from the belief Furthermore, he swore an oath in one such 
situation by saying: 

"By Allah, my uncle, had they put the sun on my 

right hand and the moon on left to leave this 

matter, I would not have left it until Allah disclosed 

His will or I die." 


Thus, this striving mistress, Khadija followed her husband, Allah's 
Messenger (pbuh) in belief and perseverance. When the people of 


527 


Quraish boycotted Muslims to besiege them politically, economically 
and socially, she stood by Muslims in Abu Talib's valley leaving her 
house to stay there for three years. The items of this boycott was written 
in a scripture and was hanged in Ka'ba She patiently endured the 
sufferings of such siege with the Messenger and his followers. She gave 
all what she had in this trial though she was sixty-five. 


Three years after the siege Abu Talib died followed by Khadiya 
(may Allah be pleased with her), three years before Hijra (immigration 
to Madina). The Prophet suffered many afflictions after the death of 
Khadija who was his truthful minister. 


The righteous soul went to her Lord after the end of her lifespan. 
She was really an excellent example in the field of the call to Allah and 
striving for His cause. She was a wise wife who gave all what she had 
to please Allah and His Messenger. Therefore, she deserved to be 
greeted by Allah and be informed that she would have a house in 
paradise. The Prophet (pbuh) said, 


"The best of women in it (Paradise) is Mariyam 
bint ‘Imaran. The best of women in it is Khadija 
bint Khuwailid.” 

May Allah be pleased with Khadija bint Khuwailid, a chaste mistress, 


loyal wife, truthful and the striving believer in the cause of belief with 
all what she had of worldly benefits. May Allah give the best reward. 


528 


Sawda Bint Zam'‘a 


She was Sawda bint Zam‘a Ibn Qays Ibn ‘Abd Shams Ibn ‘Abdul 
of Banu Amir, Quraish. Her mother was ash-Shamus bint Qaus Jbn 
Zayd Ibn Amr of Banu an-Najjar. 


She was a noble and venerable lady. She first married as-Sakran 
Ibn Amr, the brother of Suhail Ibn ‘Amr al-Amiriy whom she 
accompanied when emigrating to Abyssinia among the eight people of 
Banu ‘Amir who left their homes and their properties and crossed the sea 
to escape torture and preserve their religion. No sooner was her affliction 
in Abyssinia over than her husband died and she became a widow. 


The Prophet (pbuh) sympathized with this faithful widow 
immigrant. Therefore, as soon as Khawla bin Hakim mentioned her 
before him, he offered to help and stand by her especially because she 
grew old and needed someone to look after her. In the books of the 
prophetic biography it was narrated that none dared to speak to the 
prophet about marriage after the death of Khadija, who alone believed 
him when the people rejected him. She enriched him, when he was poor 
and from her did Allah grant him his offspring. 


After such gnef, Khawlah went to the Prophet (pubh) and 
leniently said, "Would you not marry Messenger of Allah?" He sadly 
answered, "Who could replace Khawlah?" 


She said, "Whoever you like a virgin or non-virgin. He said, "Who 
is the virgin?" She answered, "The daughter of the one you love most, 
‘Aisha bint Abi Bakr." 


After a while the Prophet (pubh) asked, "Who is the non-virgin? 
She replied, "Sawda bint Zam‘ah (may Allah be pleased with her)." 
Then, the Prophet (pbuh) betrothed ‘Aisha (may Allah be pleased with 
her) and married Sawda who remained his only wife for about three 
years until he married ‘Aisha. All the people of Makka wondered how 
the prophet would get marned to such an old widow who lost all her 
beauty! How could she succeed, the mistress of Quraish? 


529 


As a matter of fact, Sawda or any other wife could not succeed 
Khadija. But this was a kind of charity and mercy from the Prophet 
of mercy (pbuh). 


Sawdah served the household of the Prophet and his daughters. 
She pleased the Prophet's heart and helped him go on calling for 
Allah. Three years later, ‘Aisha, Hafsa, Zaynab, Umm Salama and 
others came to the Prophet's house as wives. Then, Sawdah realized 
that the Prophet (pbuh) had only married her out of sympathy, after 
her husband's death. She knew this fact clearly when the Prophet 
(pbuh) wanted to kindly separate from her to release her of such 
critical position. Being informed of the Prophet's intention of 
divorce, she felt that as if she was living in a nightmare. Therefore, 
she entreats the prophet, by saying, O Messenger of Allah, hold me. 
By Allah, I did not seek to have a husband but I just hope that Allah 
may resurrect me as your wife on the Day of Judgement." Thus she 
(may Allah be pleased with her) preferred the Prophet's desire and 
granted her night to “Aisha to please the Prophet's heart. The Prophet 
(pbuh) responded to her noble feelings. Then Allah revealed, 


te fe 4 ae “7 e244 re ee 20,0 Bele ak 
ol teyle ice Me ale) i Vogue Gh ta cole all oloe 
ip eres a oA ssn 2 ot por PTA FT ede ey ot 
Vers of cebll GY) Seely Te 15 ele yee be 
FX Foo Avrg ie PEERS ee ate © 
4D 1S OLS y OF dl Op ES, 

[VYA elLshy 


«There is no blame on them if they arrange an 

amicable settlement between themselves, and 

settlement is best; 9 

(An-Nisa’: 128) 

Sawadah remained in the Prophet's house thankful and grateful 
to Allah that He inspired such solution to her in order to be with the 
best of Allah's creatures and to be mother of the faithful and a wife 
of the Prophet in Paradise. 


530 


She (may Allah be pleased with her) died at the late years of 
“Umar's era. ‘Aisha, the mother of the faithful kept on remembering her 
favor as saying, 


"No woman I would like to imitate her save 
Sawdah bint Zam’ah who said when she grew old, 
"O Messenger of Allah I granted my day to ‘Aisha. 

But she has some kind of harshness." 
(Reported by Muslim) 


531 


‘Aisha Bint Abu Bakr 


She was a teacher of men, bint as-Siddiq, the Prophet's caliph, 
Abu Bakr ‘Abdullah Ib Abu Quhafah, Uthmen Ibn ‘Amir of the 
Quraish, Makkan, Mother of the Faithful, and the wife of the noble 
Prophet (pbuh). She was the closest wife to the Prophet and the 
daughter of the closest man to him._' Her innocence was revealed from 
the top of the seven heavens. 


She showed the world how the woman could be more 
knowledgeable than men, politician or warrior fourteen centuries ago. 
She was not a university graduate and did not study at the hands of 
orientalists or westernists. 


Rather she apprenticed and graduated in the prophetic school, the 
school of faith and knights. From the tender years of her age the shiekh 
and the most pious of Muslims, her father Abu Bakr as-Sidiq brought 
her up. Then the Prophet (pbuh) the best and the most honorable 
creature look after her when she was a youth. Therefore, she aquired a 
great deal of knowledge that was transmitted over the centuries. 


What she left of literature or legal opinions is now studied in many 
universities all over the world. Further her complete works could be points 
of study for any one who is interested in the Arab and Muslim history. 


The Prophet (pbuh) married her according to Allah's command. ” 
He (pbuh) betrothed her and Sawda at the same time but he married the 
latter who stayed with him for three years until he got married to ‘Aisha 
in Shawwal after the battle of Badr. The young bride, then, moved to 
the new house of the Prophet, which consisted of a room beside the 
mosque and was built of clay and palm-trees. The room was furnished 
with a mattress of palm-leaves beneath which there was nothing but a 


‘amr Ton al-As related that he asked the Prophet (pbuh), “Who do you love most, 
O messenger of Allah? He replied “Aisha. “Who is from among men? 

2Aishah related that the Prophet (pbuh) said to me, “You were shown to me in a 
dream. An angel brought you to me, wrapped in a piece of silken cloth and said to 
me, “This is your wife.” I removed the piece of colth from your face, and there you 
were. I said to myself, “If it from Allah, then it will surely be.” [Reported by al- 
Bukhari and Muslim] 


532 


mat. As for the door it was just a curtain of hair. In such a modest room 
‘Aisha started her mantal life which became the speech of the world. 


As awtfe of the Prophet (pbuh), ‘Aisha adopted a great position. 
She became a model for all women anywhere and in any time she was 
an ideal wife. She relieved the Prophet's grief when suffering the 
hardships of life and the da’ wah. 


She endured poverty and hunger with the Prophet (pbuh). It is 
related that they spent two or three months without cooking. All what 
they feed on were just dates and water. 


Once, when Muslims became luxurious, she was given one 
hundred thousand dirhams as a gift while she was fasting voluntarily. 
But she, at once, spent it in the cause of Allah. She was so poor that she 
had nothing to break her fast on. Thus, her maid asked her, "Would not 
you reserve a dirham in order to buy meat for breakfast?" She 
answered, had you reminded me, I would have done. She was a patient 
poor, and a modest wealthy woman. She did not adhere to this worldly 
hfe. Therefore, she thought that poverty and wealth were alike. 


She was an ideal wife who was interested in learning from the 
Prophet (pbuh). Therefore, she became so knowledgeable that she was 
able to teach men and was a source of authorization and documentation 
in hadith transmission, and sacred law. 


Az-Aubairi said, “If we compared ‘Aisha's knowledge to all 
women, ‘Aisha's would surpass them. Hisham Ibn Urwa said, I have 
never seen any one who could have knowledge of an ayah (a Qur'anic 
verse), an obligatory act, a Sunna act, poetry, history, lineage, 
Judgement, or medicine better than ‘Aisha I asked her, "What about 
medicine? How did you learn it, aunt?" She answered, "When I was 
sick, the Prophet prescribe (treatment) for me as did he when the people 
became ill. I also heard the people prescribing treatment to each other. 
Thereby I memorized such prescriptions. 


Once, Masruq was asked, "Did ‘Aisha perfect the obligatory acts." 
He answered, "By Allah, I have seen the great prophetic companions 
asking her about the obligatory acts." 


Yet, she (may Allah be pleased with her) was jealous. She was the 
most jealous wife of the Prophet (pbuh). This can be the nature of the 


533 


woman; to be jealous of other wives. But such jealousy had ever never 
led her to hurt any other wife. 


Let us now tum to the most critical incident in ‘Aisha's life: the 
incident of ifk (the lie), On the retum from the expedition of Banu 
Mustaliq there occurred what would hurt “Aisha and in tum the 
Prophet's honour. When the. march was ordered, ‘Aisha was not in her 
tent, having gone to search for a valuable necklace she had dropped. As 
her litter was veiled, it was not noticed that she was not in it, until the 
army reached the next holt. Meanwhile finding the camp had gone. She 
sat down to rest, hoping that someone would come back to fetch her 
when her absence was noticed. It was night, and she fell a sleep. Next 
moming she was found by Safwan, a Muhajir. Who had been left 
behind the camp expressly to pick up anything imadvertently left 
behind. He put her on his camel and brought her, leading the camel on 
foot. This presented an occasion to the Prophet's enemies to raise a 
malicious scandal. The ringleader among them was the chief of Madina 
Hypocrites, Abullah Ibn Ubai. 


‘Aisha was in extreme pain and anguish for an entire month 
because of the slander that was spread about her. Her husband, the 
Prophet (pbuh) and her father were also placed in a most awkward 
predicament, considering their position and the great work in which 
they were engaged. 


Eventually, Allah revealed some Qur'anic verses to free ‘Aisha's 
from such accusation. ‘Aisha was an ideal woman in suffering and 
afflictions. Therefore, she was a model for all women in both prosperity 
and adversity. 


During the Prophet's illness, after returning from the farewell 
pilgrimage he felt that he was about to die. It is narrated that when the 
prophet was being carried to spend his nights with his wives in turns, he 
would ask, where should I go tomorrow? Where should | go tomorrow? 
(hoping to be ‘Ashah's tum). Then, the mothers of the faithful offered, 
pleasantly, their tums to ‘Aisha (may Allah be pleased with them all) to 
be treated where he liked. They said, O Messenger of Allah, we gave 
our turns to * Aisha. 


The Prophet (pbuh), then moved to ‘Aisha's home who took care 
of him day and night. She would like to sacrifice herself for him as 


534 


saying "I sacnfice you with my father and mother, O Messenger of 
Allah." At the last moment of the Prophet's life, his head was placed on 
‘Aisha's knees. 


She said, "The Prophet (pbuh) died in the night of my usual turn at 
my house. Allah took him unto Him while his head was between my 
chest and my neck and his saliva was mixed with my saliva" At this 
moment, “Abudur-Rahan Ibn Abi Bakr entered holding a soft sitwak 
(tooth stick). The prophet looked at the siwak. I thought that he wished 
to brush his teeth with it. I took the stwak, chewed and then perfumed 
it. Then I gave 1t to the prophet who in turn brushed his teeth very well. 
As he returned it back, his hand fell down. I began to supplicate Allah 
with a du'‘a often said by Jibreel and also by the prophet during his 
illness. However, the Prophet did not supplicate Allah with this du’a in 
this time. He then looked skyward and said (ar-Rafeeq al- Ala) the 
heavens. Then he died. Praise be to Allah who mixed my saliva with his 
at the last moment of the Prophet's life. 


The Prophet (pbuh) was buried where he died, in her home. She 
lived after him teaching men and women, and formulating the history of 
Islam until her death. She died on Tuesday night 17th of Ramadan, 57 AH 
she was sixty-six by then. May Allah have mercy and be pleased with her. 


535 


Hafsa Bint ‘Umar 


She was Hafsa bint ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab. Allah supported Islam 
by means of her father ‘Umar. She was beautiful and pious woman. She 
got married to Khunis Ibn Hudhafa Ibn Qays as-Sahami who was from 
Quraish. He was a part of the two emigrations: to Abyssinia and to 
Madina. He fought in Badr and Uhud. In the latter battle he was fatally 
wounded and died shortly thereafter. Hafsa was eighteen years by then. 


‘Umar was depressed for his daughter's affliction who became a 
widow at such a young age. Whenever he went home and saw his sad 
daughter, he grieved. After a long period of thinking he decided to 
choose a husband for her to provide her with what she had lost of 
repose along six months, or more. 


He first chose Abu Bakr, (may Allah be pleased with him) the 
dearest person to the Prophet (pbuh) ‘Umar, at once, went to Abu Bakr 
to offer him his daughter for marriage. ‘Umar thought that Abu Bakr 
would not refuse to marry a young pious woman who was the daughter 
of the man by whom Allah supported Islam. Having sympathetically 
listened to him, Abu Bakr did not respond. 


‘Umar went back with a broken heart and almost did not believe 
what had happened. He then went to Uthman Ibn Affan whose wife, 
Rugayya, the daughter of the Prophet had recently died. Having offered 
him his daughter to marry, he apologized by saying, "I think I would 
not like to marry at the present time." 


‘Umar's gloom increased by Uthman's refusal, which followed 
Abu Bakr's. He became angry with his two intimate friends. Then, he 
went to the Prophet (pbuh) complaining about Abu Bakr and *Uthman. 
Thereupon, the Prophet (pbuh) smiled and said, 


"Hafsa will get married to someone who is better 
than Uthman and Uthman will get married 
to someone who is better than Hafsa." 


(Reported by al-Bukhari) 


536 


Accordingly “Umar was elated to receive such a great honour 
which he never thought about it. He went off to tell whomever he met. 
When Abu Bakr met him, he realized the source of his joy. Therefore, he 
congratulated him and apologized by saying, "Do not be angry with me, 
“Umar. The Prophet has mentioned Hafsa before and I could not disclose 
the Prophet's secret (pbuh). Had he left her, I would have married her." 


All people in Madina was pleased with the Prophet's marriage to 
Hafsa bint “Umar. It was contracted in the month of Sha‘ban in the third 
year of Hijra. They blessed the marriage of ‘Uthman to Umm Kulthum 
bint Muhammed (pbuh) i the month of Jumada al-Akhirah in the same 
year as well. Thus, Hafsa joined the rank of the Prophet's pure wives, 
mothers of the faithful who were, by then, Sawdah and * Aisha. 


Among the other wives of the Prophet (pbuh), ‘Aisha was the 
most intimate and closest one to Hafsa His father, once, said to her, 
"How would you be like ‘Aisha and how would your father be 
like hers?” 


It is Hafsa and ‘Aisha who backed up each other against the 
Prophet (pbuh). Consequently Allah the Almighty said, 


ae ae se et eo pe Re TOE Ge es ee 
As Sa aif Ob 48 FE ot, SE cas 8 op 
LEED Ce wer Ar nee 2 ir ae zo 
[t ep] (@) gk MS ay reais oxsjall oe doses 


«lf ye two turn in repentance to Allah, your hearts 

are indeed so inclined; but if ye back up each other 

against him, truly Allah is his protector and 

Gabriel 

(At-Tahnm: 4) 

It is narrated that the prophet (pbuh) divorced Hafsa once when 
she backed up against him. Then he took her back according to Jibreel's 
command: 


"Take Hafsa back; she fasts and prays in the night 
all the time." 


537 


Hafsa realized the gravity of what she had done to her noble 
husband when she disclosed his secret. But after the Prophet forgave 
her, she lived in tranquility and repose again. 


When the Prphet (pbuh) died and Abu Bakr (may Allah be pleased 
with him) succeeded him, it was Hafsa who was chosen to keep the first 
copy of the glorious Qur'an. She kept on worshipping Allah devoutly, 
fasting, praying and keeping the copy of the Muslim constitution, the 
immortal miracle and the source of legislation and belief. 


When her father, the caliph of the Muslim felt that he was about to 
die after he was stabbed by Abu Lu'lu’a, the Zoroastrian in the month of 
Zul-Hijjah, 23 AH Hafsa was the guard of what he left of inheritance. 


She (may Allah be pleased with her) died in Mu’awiyah ibn Abu 
Sufyan’s era after she commended her brother Abdullah with what she 
had been commended by her father. May Allah be pleased with the 
guard of the Qur’an. 


538 


Umm Salama 


She was Hind bint Umayyah Ibn Al-Mugheerah al-Makhzumiyyah 
who was from Quraish. His father was a prominent master in Quraish. 
He was called Zad ar-Rakib (a provision for the passenger). This was 
because, when travelling he used to suffice whomever accompany him. 
As for her mother, she was “Atikah bint ‘Amir ibn Rabi'ah al- 
Kananiyyah who was from Banu Firas. 


Besides her honorable and well-established lineage, she was a 
beautiful and an intuitive woman. She first got married to Abu Salama, 
‘Abudullah Ibn ‘Abdel-Asad al Makhzumi who emigrated twice: to 
Abyssinia and Madina. 


She was a good, loyal and obedient wife who stood by her 
husband and suffered many kinds of torture with him in the cause of 
Allah. Then, she immigrated with him to Abyssinia to escape torture 
and to preserve the belief. They left all what they had of property, kin 
and land. There, she gave birth to Salama. 


After the chart of boycott had been nullified, and after Hamza and 
“Umar had embraced Islam, they returned to Makka with the other 
people. After the Prophet (pbuh) had given permission to Muslim to 
emigrate, Abu Salama decided to leave with his family. It was a tragedy, 
so let us lend our ears to Umm Salama to narrate the details of this story. 


Umm Salama said, "When Abu Salama decided to set out for 
Madina, he prepared his camel to carry me and his son on it. Then, he 
led the camel towards Madina. Being seen by men of Banu al- 
Mugheerah, they obstructed us. They said, "We could not control you, 
Abu Salama? What about your wife? Why did we let you wandering 
with her in the land? Then, they pulled the camel's rein from his hand 
and took me back. Accordingly, enraged with anger, Banu ‘Abdel Asad 
took my son and said to my husband's family, "By Allah we would not 
leave our son in her custody after you had taken him from our kin." 


Then, each group took one of the boy's arms and started to pull 
until they took off his arm. Afterwards, my husband's family took the 
boy and my family detained me. 


539 


Abu Salama went to Madina alone to preserve himself and his 
belief. Meanwhile I felt alienated, as I could not see my husband or my 
son. Every day I used to go out and sit in the same place where I lost 
my husband and son. There I sat to remember them and wept for a year. 
Eventually, once, a cousin of mine passed by me and found me in such 
a state. He sympathized with me. Then he went a head to my family and 
said, "O kinsmen would you release this poor woman. You kept her 
away from her husband and her son." 


He kept on stimulating their sentiments until they released me. 
Thereupon, Banu ‘Abdel Asad gave me my son back. I got my camel 
ready and then I set out alone for Madina where my husband lived. 


When I arrived at Tan‘eem (a place in Makka) I met ‘Uthman Ibn 
Talha (who was at that time an atheist) but he embraced Islam during 
the truce of Hudaibtyah). He said, “where were you going, daughter of 
the provision of passengers?" I replied, to my husband in Madina. He 
asked, "Did you have any one accompanying you?” I said, "I have none 
but Allah and then my son. He, therefore, said, “By Allah I would not 
leave you alone." 


He held the camel's rein and went forward to Madina. By Allah, I 
have never seen any generous or honorable Arab like him. When we 
had to rest, he tied my camel and then took himself away and sat down 
under a tree. When we were about to go on walking, he prepared my 
camel and then kept himself aside and then said, "Now you on ride". 


After I rode the camel, he then came to lead it. He kept on doing that 
until we reach Madina. When he saw the village of ‘Umar ibn ‘Auf in 
Qiba' where Abu Salama lived, he said,"That was your husband's village, 
you could go to him by Allah's blessing." Then, he went back to Makka. 


Thus, Umm Salama was the first emigrant woman to Madina as was she 
to Abyssinia. 

In Mainah she devoted her life to rearmg her children. This is the 
most important role of women te., to look after her children and to 
comfort her husband in order to let him fight in the cause of Allah and 
raise higher the banner of Islam. Thereby, Abu Salama fought in the 
battle of Badr and Uhud very well until he recerved an arrow in his 
forelimb. He treated his wound until he thought that it became better. 


540 


Two months later after Uhad, the Prophet (pbuh) was informed 
that Banu Asad were gathering to attack him in Madina. He, therfore, 
called Abu Salama and appointed him as the leader of a squad of about 
150 men including Abu Ubaidah and Sa'd ibn Abu Waagas to attack 
them in Qutn (a mount). 

Following the Prophet's instructions Abu Salama attacked the 
enemy suddenly in the morning, before they were prepared and they 
were victorious. In addition to the spoils of war, which they had gained, 
they also restored the Muslims position, which had been affected in Uhud. 

In this battle Abu Salama's wound, which he had recetved in Uhud 
was stirred again. Accordingly he remained in his bed to be treated 
Meanwhile, he said to his wife, "Umm Salama, I heard the Messenger 
of Allah (pbuh) as saying, 


"When a Muslim meets a catastrophe and says "To 
Allah we shall return" and then says, "O Allah! 
May You reward me for my catastrophe and 
replace it with something better", he will get what 

he asks." 

One day the Prophet (pbuh) went to visit him. No sooner was the 
Prophet about to leave than Abu Salama died. Thereby, the Prophet 
(pbuh) closed his eyes with his honorable hands. Then he looked 
skyward and said, 


"QO Allah! May you forgive Abu Salama, raise his 
rank among the closest people, succeed him in his 
family and forgive us and him, O the Lord of 
Worlds.” 

Umm Salama received this catastrophe with a faithful heart and a 
patient soul. She surrendered to Allah's destiny and remembered what 
Abu Salama narrated on the authority of the Prophet (pbuh). Then she 
said, "O Allah reward me for my catastrophe... She was reluctant to 
complete the du’ a: 


"and replace it with something better.” 


541 


She wondered, who could be like Abu Salama!? But finally she 
completed the du’a as a worship to Allah. 


After her waiting period (out of mourning for her deceased husband) 
had ended, many great companions proposed marriage to her. It was the 
Muslims customs when one of the them died, they looked after the 
deceased's wife by marrying her. But Umm Salama rejected them all. 


The Prophet (pbuh) thought of this hononrable, true faithful and 
patient woman. He thought that it is better not to leave her alone 
without a husband. 


One day as she was tanning a hide of an animal, the Prophet (pbuh) 
asked for her permission to enter. She permitted him and offered him a 
pillow on which he sat down. He, then, proposed marriage to her. Umm 
Salama was amazed and did not believe what she heard. She soon 
remembered the hadith related by Abu Salama: 


"and replace my catastrophe with something 
better.” 


She realized that this surely the best replacement. But because she 
was true and faithful, she did not hesitate to disclose her defects before 
the Prophet (pbuh). She said, welcome O Messenger of Allah. How 
could not I like you!? but I am very jealous and I fear I might do 
something that leads me to incur Allah's torture. | am also an old 
woman and have children. Thereupon, the Prophet (pbuh) said, I am 
older than you and there is no blame if a man marries a woman who is 
older than him. As for your statement; "I have children,” Allah and his 
Messenger will suffice them. 


Then, as for your saying, "I am very jealous", I will invoke Allah 
to make you forget such a habit. Then, Umm Salama surrendered to the 
Prophet (pbuh) and said, Allah substitutes Abu Salama for whom is 
better than him: the Messenger of Allah (pbuh). She, then, became a 
Mother of the Faithful. She lived in the Prophet's home putting before 
her eyes such new honourable position. 


She was a rational and wise woman. In the day of Hudaibiyah, the 
Prophet (pbuh) commanded his companions to slaughter their animals 
after he concluded the truce with Quraish. However the companions did 
not respond. They thought that such truce was a kind of oppression to 


542 


Muslims. The Prophet (pbuh) repeated his command three times 
without any response. Accordingly, he went home angry and mentioned 
what had happened to Umm Salama. Therefore, she (may Allah be 
pleased with her) said, O Messenger of Allah if you would like the 
Muslims do what you want, you would better go out and do not speak 
with any one until you slaughter your camel and have your hair cut. 


Then, the Prophet (pbuh) approved her opinion and did what she 
said. As soon as the people saw the Prophet doing that, they started to 
slaughter their animals and cut the hair of one another to such an extent 
that they were about to kill one another. 


After the Prophets death, Umm Salama kept watching the 


procession of events and declaring her opinions to guide the people and 
keep them away of corruption and oppression particularly the rulers. 


Eventually, she died in the month of Zul-qi'dah, 59 AH She was 
eighty-four by then. Actually, she set a good example to Muslim 
women. 


543 


Umm Habeeba 
Ramla Bint Abu Sufayn 


She was Ramla bint Abu Sufyan, the leader of Quraish and the 
unbeliever's until the great victory. But, she embraced Islam though her 
father was an atheist by then. He could not convince her to stay an 
atheist. Furthermore, she endured all kinds of hardships and sufferings 
in the cause of Allah and her belief. 


She got married to ‘Ubaidellah Ibn Jahsh who embraced Islam as 
well. When Muslims were put into affliction and persecution she 
emigrated to Abysinniya with her husband where she gave birth to 
Habeeba, a girl. 


She kept patient and endured the sufferings of alienation and 
estrangement until she was taken by something she did not expect. Let 
us lend our ears to her to know what happened. 


She said, "I saw in a dream my husband, Ubaidellah Ibn Jahsh in 
bad and disfigured appearance. I was a horrible dream. In the moming I 
found that he converted to Christianity. I told him what I had seen in 
my dream. But he did not care about that." 


This wretched abostate did his best to convert his wife. But she 
refused and resorted to her belief. She begged him to stay a Muslim but 
he refused. Then he started to drink wine so excessively that he died 
after few days. 


Afterwards Ramla not only suffered alienation in the land to which 
she emigrated but also she became a widow. Yet she kept patient and 
endured such severe afflictions. She put before her eyes Allah's saying: 


544 


(ada 


eee | AG at ae pe F “ - doe Soe 
S93 Wptl, BERL Sayyb SI ae asus Seal Sl Ge 
ah nb OS oh ey LE tes Fea A ageless ay Sa Jue 


oo ge e eS 
Yi 4 as @ Ge 4 wae’ ong By Peay 
G4 4p ele ER GAS, Opn LIC fe ne ere Le Go ve 


se Os Stele se ae 


€And for those who fear Allah, He (ever) prepares 

a way out, and He provides for him from (sources) 

he never could expect. And if any one puts his trust 

in Allah, sufficient is His purpose: verily, for all 

things has Allah appointed a due proportion? 

(At-Talaq: 2-3) 

One day she saw in a dream that someone called her by saying, "O 
mother of the faithful." She interpreted her dream to mean that the 
Prophet (pbuh) would marry her. Such a dream strengthened her 
fortitude as Allah willed. 

No sooner did her waiting period end than an abyssinian slave girl 
visited her to offer her the Prophet's proposal to marry her. She, out of 
joy, said to the maid aloud, "may Allah bless you" She also gave her 
what she wear of jewelry. Then she sent to Said Ibn al-As to 
commission him to conduct the marriage upon the request of Nagus 
who was commissioned by the Prophet (pbuh). 

In the evening, Nagus gathered all Muslims im Abyssinia. Muslims 
gathered together headed by Ja‘far Ibn Abu Talib, the Prophet's cousin. 
Thereupon, Nagus delivered a speech. He said, 


"Praise be to Allah, the Sovereign, the Holy One, 


the Source of Peace (and perfection), the Guardian 
of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in 


545 


Might, the Irresistible, the Justly Proud. I testify 
that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is 
the Messenger of Allah about whom ‘Issa Ibn 

Maryam (pbuh) told. To proceed: The Messenger 
of Allah sent me a message and asked me to give 
him Umm Habbeebah bint Abu Sufyan in marriage. 
Therefore, I responded to what the Messenger of 
Allah asked. Thereby, I'll give her four hundred 
dinars as a dowry. He, then, poured the dinars 
hefore the people. 

Afterwards, Khalid Ibn Sa'id had the tum to speak. He said, 
"Praise be to Allah. I praise Him and seek His help. I testify 
that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is 
His servant and His Messenger, whom He sent with 
the guidance and the Religion of Truth and that He 
will make it prevail over all religions, even though 
the pagans may detest it. 


To proceed: I responded to what the Messenger of 
Allah asked. Thereby, I'll give him Umm 
Habbeebah bint Abu Sufyan in marriage. May 
Allah bless the marriage to the Prophet (pbuh). 

Then, Nagus paid the dowry to Khalid Ibn Said and held the 
wedding feast and said, "Have a seat, it is the Prophets sunna when 
marrying to offer food." 

When the Muslims came out victorious in Khaybar and the 
emigrants of Abyssinia returned at the same time, the Prophet said, "I 
do not know with what occasion I should be happy!" The victory in 
Khaybar or the advent of Ja far? 

Umm Habeebah was among the emigrants. There, he 
consummated his marriage with her in the sixth or seventh year of the 
Hijrah calendar. 


546 


Umm Habeebah kept on preferring her belief to all ties of kinship. 
She declared that all what she was concerned about was Allah and His 
Messenger (pbuh). This was illustrated in her attitude to her father Abu 
Sufyan when he visited her in Madina. His visit was to try convincing 
her husband, the Prophet (pbuh) to renew the period of Hudaibyah 
covenant after the disbelevers had breached their covenant. Abu Sufyan 
wanted to sit down upon the Prophet's mat, but she folded it and put it 
away. He wondered, "O daughter, I do not know whether it is better for 
me to sit upon this mat or not." She quietly answered, "It is the 
Prophet's mat and you are a disbeliever and impure. Thereby I did not 
like you to sit upon the Prophet's mat. He said, "O daughter, "you are 
surely seized by something evil after you left me." She firmly answered, 
"It is better to say, “Allah had guided me to Islam. O father, you are the 
leader of Quraish. I wonder how you could miss entering Islam. You 
only worship a deaf and blind stone. Then, he went back angry. What a 
great a ttitude that deserve al! kind of reverence and respect. 


After the Prophet's death (pbuh), Umm Habeebah stayed in her 
home. She would only leave for prayer. She did not leave Madina but 
for performing pilgrimage until she died. She was seventy years by 
then. She set a great example in adhering to belief and desisting the pre- 
Islamic values. She disregarded the ties of kinship when it contradicted 
her belief. May Allah be pleased with her. 


547 


Zaynab Bint Jahsh 


She was Zaynab bint Jahsh, a Mother of the Believers, bint Rabab 
Ibn Ya'mur. Her mother was Umaima, the Prophet's aunt from the 
paternal side. She was called Burra before the Prophet married her. The 
Prophet (pbuh) changed her name to Zainab. 

The Prophet (pbuh) betrothed her for his previous slave, Zayd Ibn 
Harithah (the beloved of the Prophet (pbuh). Zainab and her family did not 
like such proposal. But the Prophet (pbuh) said, "I like it for you". She 
said, "O Messenger of Allah, I do not like it for myself. Moreover, | am the 
most beloved single woman in my family and I am your cousin. Thus I 
could not do that." Therefor, Allah the Almighty revealed, 


Bee Fe gf PDE LE BEE, SGP OGIO ig Gite BIO. he Ve > ee Ree 
sl 2h SG ol VA pate Sih gab ge) ob lay 
i fer Gy etl BM Ber Loe ge ge Ee 
GD) Ge we | ie Ay ail Gas cy gael & 


(WN ley 


dit is not fitting for a believer, man or woman, 
when a matter has been decided by Allah and His 
Messenger, to have any option about their 
decision: If anyone disobeys Allah and His 
Messenger, he is indeed on a clearly wrong path. - 
(al-Ahzab: 36) 
Thereupon, Zaynab got married to Zayd to obey the command of 
Allah and His Messenger and to be committed to the Islamic principle in 
which all people are cqual. None can be preferred to another except by 
piety. The marriage however turned out to be unhappy. Zaynab the high- 
born looked down upon Zayd the freedman who had been a slave. And he 
was not comely to look at. Both were good people in their own way, and 
both loved the Prophet, but there was mutual incompatibility and this is 


548 


fatal to married life. Zayd wished to divorce her, but the Prophet (pbuh) 
asked him to hold his hand and to fear Allah although the Prophet had 
known previously that there must be divorce and he himself will be 
commanded by Allah to marry her. The aimed was to destroy the pagan 
taboo about adopted sons and superstition of erecting false relationships to 
the detriment or loss of blood relations. However, the Prophet (pbuh) 
would not want to tell Zayd or any other what the purpose of Shari'ah was 
behind such a marriage. He feared that the people, especially disbeliever's, 
might circulate that Muhammad got married to his son's wife thereupon 
Allah revealed, 


Cty AL er 4 Ay Be visee ee es < a Ake > 

By Sess le Kol ale ElTy ale ail pal Ga Seas 35% 
oe Gite Rigo TP AAT ets Yule or aks ee es 
AES Ol el ably OO tty ae Oil Soha 4b BEs aa 


ap?e se Le pe Ee fy og Shoe oo fee 


Re a Me ee pe wee 
3 E> Gl IR YN Soy) Voy YE 32) Od Lb 
fey te a REN eae Rae ee oh 0% 
@ Vai fl Fl SG OE, Bete The iy reeesl Sil 


[kV oleh 


«Behold! Thou didst say to one who had received 
the grace of Allah and thy favorer: "Retain than 
(in wedlock) thy wife, and tear Allah." But thou 
didst hide in thy heart that which Allah was about 
to make manifest: 


Thou didst fear the people, but it is more fitting that 
than shouldst. Fear Allah, Then when Zayd had 
dissolved (his marriage) with her we joined her in 
marriage to thee: In order that (in future) there may 
be no difficulty to the believers in the (matter of) 
marriage with the wives of their adopted sons; when 
the latter have dissolved (their marriage) with them. 


And Allah's command must be fulfilled. » 
(al-Ahzab: 37) 


549 


Al-Wagidi stated, this ayah (verse) was revealed while the Prophet 
(pbuh) was talking to ‘Aisha at home. Then, he had a shiver and then 
recovered and smiled. He said) who would go to please Zainab? Then, he 
recited the verse. When she was informed, she thanked and prayed to Allah. 

Thus, Allah joined Zaynab (may Allah be pleased with her) in 
marriage to His Prophet (pbuh) without a bride's guardian or witnesses. 
The contract of marriage was stated in the glorious Qur'an. She boasted 
over the other mothers of the faithful by saying, "It is your families who 
concluded your marriage but Allah concluded mine from above His throne” 

In another version, she said, "Allah concluded my marriage in the 
heaven." And in another version she said, "Allah concluded my 
marriage from above the seven heavens." She also said, "I have the 
most honorable guardian, your families concluded your marriage and 
Allah concluded mine from above the seven heavens." 

She was righteous, pious and truly faithful. ‘Aisha ascertained that 
by saying, "I have never seen a woman who is better than Zaynab in 
religion, piety, truthfulness, keeping good terms with kinship 
relationship, charity, doing devotional work." 


She (may Allah be pleased with her was generous, charitable she 
would tan hides and weave clothes to give them in cause of Allah to the 
needy and the poor. 


When she died ‘Aisha said, "A thank-giver a devout and a haven 
of orphans and widows has passed away." Then she said, "Once the 
Prophet (pbuh) said to his wives, 

"The one who will die after me is the one with the 
biggest hand” 
Then, after the Prophet's death we gathered together and extended our 
hands higher along the well. They kept doing that until Zaynab bint 
Jahsh died. She was not taller than us. But we realized that the Prophet 
(pbuh) meant, the long hand which spends charity. 

Zainab worked for the poor, for whom she provided from the 
proceeds of her manual work, as she was skilful in leatherwork. She 
died soon after the Prophet (pbuh) The leader of the believers, “Umar 
ibn al-Khattab prayed over her corpse. The people of Madina walked in 
her funeral until they buried her in Baqee’. She was the first to die after 
the Prophet (pbuh) among his wives. May Allah have mercy on her. 


550 


Safiyya Bint Huhayy 


She was Safiyya bint Huyay Ibn Akhtab ibn Sa'yah. She 
belonged to al-Lawi ibn Israel ibn Ishaq ibn Ibrahim (may peace be 
upon them all) she was also a descendent of the Prophet Harun. She 
was chaste, rational, beautiful, religious and of good family. She got 
married to Sallam ibn Abu Al-Hugaiq before Islam. Then she 
married Kinanah ibn Abu al-Hugaiq. Both of her husbands were 
Jewish poets. Kinanah was killed was in the battle of Khaybar and 
his wife, Safiyya was captured like all other Jewish women. 


Bilal, the Prophet's Muezien led Safiyya and a cousin of hers 
and made them cross the scene of fighting in which there were many 
Jewish deaths. Safiyya kept patient and did not worry or cry. Unlike 
Safiyya, her cousin cried, slapped her cheeks and put earth over her 
head. 

They were brought before the Prophet (pbuh). When the 
Prophet (pbuh) noticed the impatient state of Safiyya's cousin which 
was manifested in her torn dress, dusty face and cries, he said, "Take 
this devil away!" Then he came close to Safiyya and looked kindly 
to her. Then he said, "Did mercy forsake you Bilal to lead two 
women through the deaths of their men." 


Then, the Prophet turned to Safiyya and covered her with his 
garment and kept her behind him. This was an indication that the 
Prophet (pbuh) chose her for himself. Muslims did not know, by 
then, whether the Prophet married her or adopted her as a slave girl? 
But after he veiled her, they realized that the married her. 


In a prophetic hadith narrated by Anas (may Allah be pleased 
with him) that when the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) took Safiyya bint 
Huyah, he said to her, "Do you like me?" She said, "O Messenger of 
Allah when I was an atheist I wished that. Then how would I be after 
I had embraced Islam?" 


551 


After her waiting period had expired (to verify that she is not 
pregnant) the Prophet married her and made her dowry freeing her. 
The prophet (pbuh) waited for a period of time in Khaybar until they 
reposed, he took Safiyya behind him after she became familiar with 
the new position. 


The Prophet encamped with his army six miles away from 
Khaybar. He wanted to sleep with her but she refused. Thereby, he 
became angry of her refusal. 


The prophet (pbuh) went on walking towards Madina followed 
by his army. When he reached as-Sahba’ (a place) he encamped 
there to have a rest. He noticed Safiyya ready for consummating the 
marriage. Then Umm Ana Ibn Malik (may Allah be pleased with 
her) came to comb, adorn and perfume her until she became so 
charming. Umm Sinan commented, "I never saw a bright woman 
like her." The wedding banquet was offered in which the people ate 
of Khayber food: dates, oil, milk, until they became satiated. 


When the Prophet (pbuh) was alone with her, he was angry with 
due to her previous refusal. She (the bride) lovingly told him an 
amazing tiding. She said, "I saw in a dream when I got married to 
Kinanah ibn ar-Rabee’ the moon falling upon my knee. When I got 
up I narrated the dream to Kinanah. He got angry and said, "Would 
you like the King of Hijaz, Muhammad?" Then He slapped my face. 
The trace of this punch was still in her face. The Prophet (pbuh) 
smiled and then asked, "Why did you refuse me at the first time?" 
She, at once, answered, "I feared the Jews who might be nearby" 
then the Prophet's face became bright and he consummated his 
marriage with her. She was seventeen by then. 


Narrated Anas (may Allah be pleased upon him), "The 
Prophet (pbuh) stayed for three days ait a place 
between Khaybar and = Madina, and _ there he 
consummated his marriage with Safiyya bint Huiyay. I 
invited the Muslims to a banquet, which included 
neither meat nor bread. The Prophet (pbuh) ordered 
for leather dining sheets to be spread and then the 
dates, dreiet yoghourt and butter were provided over It, 


552 


and that was the banquet (walima) of the Prophet 
(pbuh). The Muslims asked whether Safiyya would be 
considered as his wife or as a slave girl of what his 
right hand possessed. Then they said, "If the Prophet 
(pbuh) screens her from the the people, then she iss the 
Prophet's wife but if he does not screen her, then she is 
a slave girl." So when the Prophet (pbuh) proceeded he 
made a place for her (on the camel) behind him and 
screened her from people.” 
[Reported by Bukhari] 
Reaching Madina, the Prophet (pbuh) did not let her stay with 
his other wives. Rrather he preferd that she stay in the house of his 
companion, Harithah ibn an-Nu’ man. 


When the women in Madina knew her coming, they looked 
forward to seeing her. The Prophet (pbuh) noticed ‘Aisha hiding 
herself among the women in order to see her. Although she was 
veiled, the Prophet identified her, held her dress and asked her, 
"What did you see, O Shugaira’ (blond woman)?" She out of jealousy 
answered, "She is just a Jewish woman." The prophet (pbuh) replied, 
"Do not say that; she embraced Islam." 


When Safiyya moved to the Prophet's house, the other Prophet's 
wives became jealous of her beauty. Therefore, they boasted over her 
about their Arabic origin while she was foreigner. 


Once, she was informed that Hafsa said that she was a daughter 
of a Jew and that made her weep. When the prophet (pbuh) found her 
weeping, he asked, "Why do you weep?" She replied, "Hafsa said 
that I am the daughter of a Jew." Then the Prophet (pbuh) said, "You 
are the daughter of a Prophet, the niece of a Prophet and the wife of a 
Prophet. Thus, how could she boast over you?" Then, he said, "Fear 
Allah, Hafsa." 


Such words pleased her. Whenever any one boasted herself 
over her, she often said: "Why, I am Muhammad's wife, Harun's 
daughter and Musa's niece." 


553 


It is related that she had a bondswoman during the caliphate of 
‘Umar who went to him and said, "Safiyya loves Saturday and has 
connections with the Jews. Whereupon ‘Umar sent for her and 
investigated the case. She replied, "As for Saturday, I have not loved 
it since Allah gave me Friday in its place, and as for the Jews, I have 
kinfolk among them and maintain my family ties." When she asked 
her servant what made her do what that, she was told, "The Devil," 
to which Safiyya responded, "You may go now, you are free." 

She died in Madianh in 50 AH - 670 AC during the caliphate of 
Mu'awyah. She was buried in Bagee' beside the other Mothers of the 
Believers (may Allah be pleased with them all) 


554 


Juwairiya bint Al-Harith 


She was Juwairiya bint al-Harith ibn Abu Dirar ibn Labib al- 
Khuza iyya, who was from Mustalaq. She was a beautiful woman. 
She was taken as a prisoner of war when Muslims defeated the tribe 
of Banu al-Mustalaq in the battle of Al-Muraysee'. 


When the spoils of the war were distributed among the warriors, 
Juwairtya was in the share of Thabit ibn Qays ibn ash-Shammas or a 
cousin to him. She was twenty by then. She tried to escape such 
slavery and made a contract with Thabit ibn Qays to free her in 
return for money. Then she went to the Prophet (pbuh) asking for 
help; to free herself. The Prophet (pbuh) sympathized with her and 
said, "Would you want something better than that?" She anxiously 
said, "What is this, Messenger of Allah he said, "I will pay your 
contract and marry you" she was so happy that she could not believe 
what she heard. She pleasantly agreed. Then, the Prophet (pbuh) 
said, "Ok". 

“Aisha narrated, "Then the people knew that the Prophet (pbuh) 
got married to Juwairiya bint al-Harith ibn Abu Dirar. Thereupon, 
they freed whom they had captured of her tribe because they became 
relatives by marriage. They freed about a hundred of Banu al- 
Mustalaq families. I have never known a woman who blessed her 
tribe greater than her." 


“Aisha, the mother of the believers added, "She (Juwayriya) had 
a good looking and captivated whomever saw her." When she came 
to the Prophet (pbuh) to help her pay the contract of freedom. By 
Allah, no sooner did I see her standing by my door than I grew 
jealous and expected that the Prophet (pbuh) world realize what I 
realized." 


555 


Afterwards, the bride of Banu al-Mustalaq joined the Prophet's 
house. She was called Burrah before the Prophet (pbuh) changed her 
name to Juwairlya. 


Ibn Hajar stated in "Al-Isabah" that Juwairiya was a true 
faithful. Once her father came to the Prophet (pbuh) complaining 
about the capture of his daughter. Then the Prophet said, "Would you 
like to give her the choice?" He said, "Ok." Accordingly, her father 
offered her to return, she said, I have chosen Allah and His 
Messenger." 


Ibn Hisham also narrated that her father, al-Harith, two of his 
sons and some people of his tribe embraced Islam. She (may Allah 
be pleased with her) died in 50 or 56 AH may Allah have mercy on 
her whose marriage was a blessing for her tribe. After the Prophet 
(pbuh) had married her, her people converted to Islam. This is of 
course one of the wisdoms of polygamy in Islam. 


556 


Maymuna 


She was Maymuna bint al-Hurith ibn Hazan ibn Bujair, ibn al- 
Hazm, ibn Ruwaiba ibn ‘Abdullah, ibn Hilal, ibn ‘Amer, ibn Sa‘sa‘a al- 
Hilaliyya. She was a sister of Umm al-Fadl, Al-Abbas’ wife, an aunt of 
Khalid ibn al-Walid and ibn Abbas (may Allah be pleased with them 
all). She was among the mistresses of Quraish who were famous of 
honour and nobility. 


She first got married to Masud ibn Amr ath-Thagafi before Islam. 
Nevertheless, she frequently visited her sister, Umm al-Fadl; from her 
she learnt some teachings of Islam and the news of the Islamic victory 
in Badr and Uhud that affected her heart. 


When the Muslims retumed victorious after the battle of Khaybar, 
she was in her sister's house. She was so happy because of the victory. 
When she went home, she found her husband depressed and sad. They 
quarreled and then separated each other. She resorted to Al-Abbas' house. 


When the Prophet (pbuh) and the Muslims came to stay in Makka 
for three days to perform their rites as stated in the Hudaybya truce, 
they entered Makka peacefully on the appinted day. Then they loudly 
chanted "“labbayka allahumma labayk. Labbayka la shareeka lake 
labbyaka" (Ever at Your service, O Allah, ever at Your service. Ever at 
Your service. You have no partner, ever at Your service.” All parts of 
Makka responded to this clamour and the land beneath the disbeliever's 
feet quivered. They resorted to mountains and hills so as not to see 
Muhammad and Muslims’ returning to Makka strong. Some men and 
women of those who did not declare thier faith publicly stayed in 
Makka believing that the day of victory was coming. Maymuna was 
among those who did not declare their faith, However she was not 
satisfied with her hidden belief. Therefore, she declared publicly that 
she embraced Islam. Furthermore, she wanted to declare her wish to 
join the Prophet's house. She talked to her sister Umm al-Fadl about her 
wish. In turn, her sister told her husband Al-Abbas and commissioned 
him to her marriage. Then Al-Abbas went at once to the Prophet (pbuh) 


557 


and offered him to marry Maymuna. The prophet (pbuh) accepted the 
proposal and gave her four hundred dirhams as dowry. In another 
version it was stated that, "it was Maymuna who gave herself to the 
Prophet (pbuh) to wed her. Thereupon Allah the Almighty revealed, 


ip Bike ee Se Sa SR apusltigae Thee Dering oe eee che 

ES Gee cls Fa ceil Ee ieee lie 
tet eee A OG yee Fat wee an Ln oa “ + 
Bs ok ee ols She olay athe “si cl tee teed 


a 


Bem Siy WOT ee. ieee Cees feito fee 7 8re Rees 
ee on & er) & of oa foe oe easy 77% 
Ge 8 Gat os o¢ Ol calle SAA ol Goll ob 


Zz 
@€ 74 “oe 


LAKE BSS SS PS EEL OS peel G ek Cee 
Ds 


‘ (FX Sf 6 FAT 
powiry QC Gs 


€And any believing woman who gives herself to the 
Prophet if the Prophet wishes to wed her; this only 


for thee, and not for the believers (at large) - 
(Al-Ahzab: 50) 


After the Prophet had stayed for three days as stated in the 
covenant of al-Hudaybiya, the people of Quraish asked him to leave. 
The prophet leniently asked, "Would you leave me to wed among you, 
and I would invite you to the wedding feast? But, they harshly replied, 
we do not need your food we just want you to leave." 


The polytheists feared the Prophet's stay among them because they 
knew his great impact on hearts. For example, Maymuna not only 
embraced Islam but offered herself to the Prophet to marry her. 


Accordingly, the Prophet (pbuh) gave permission to leave and did 
not complete his wedding to Maymuna. On reaching Saraf (a place) ten 
miles away from Makka, he slept with his bride for the first time in the 
month of Shawwal, in the seventh year of the Hyjrah calendar. 


When Maymuna arrived at Madina, she joined the pure prophetic 
house as an honourable woman and a Mother of the Believers. She 


558 


(may Allah be pleased with her) led a life of sincerity and obedience to 
her husband. 


She lived after the Prophet's death for about fifty years, all of 
which are full of devotion, piety and loyalty to the Prophet's memory. 
Ibn ‘Ata’ said) "When Maymuunah died, I went out with Ibn ‘Abbas 
who said, "Do not shake her and be tender with her she is your mother." 
“Aisha also said, when Maymuna died, "Oh, Maymuna passed away, 
By Allah, she was pious and kept good terms with her kinship ties. May 
Allah have mercy on her. 


The Prophet As A Husband 


Having discussed the stories of the Mothers of the Believers (may 
Allah be pleased with them all) we would like to highlight the reason 
that these nine wives were such good and righteous examples for men 
and women in all walks of life, branches of knowledge, wisdom, piety 
and good manners. 

If we examine the Prophet's behavior with his wives before his 
Messengership and after, we will realize the reason. We might also 
conclude that the Prophet undoubtedly had tended the position of the 
mothers of the Believers. Just as they say, "There is a lady behind every 
great man" it should also be said, "The better the horse the better the 
horseman" 

The Prophet (pbuh) was the leader, the teacher and the example of 
the people, men and women in treating his wives kindly. He was also 
just in spending the nights in turns with each, expenditure, kindness, 
honoring them and enduring their anger, jealousy and dispute. He used 
to visit them every morning to preach and teach them and in the 
evening for amusement. He would periodically assemble with them in 
their houses alternatively. The Prophet (pbuh) also used to serve in his 
home and attend to his needs himself. 

Now, let us highlight some aspects of the Prophet's life as a husband 
concerning the affairs of his house in which there are many wives of 
different races, ages and behaviors living, together. We have to bear in 
mind that such success and prosperity was not confined to his home. 
Rather, it encompasses all aspects of life: political, economical social. 

We might hear about great leaders who achieved many progresses 
in the field of policy and in leading their own people. Nevertheless, if 
we investigated their marital life we will discover that they could not 
deal with their wives even if they had only one. Therefore, we are going 
to highlight only three aspects of the prophet (pbuh) as a husband: 


1- The Prophet, the strait husband. 


2- The Prophet, the funny husband. 
3- The Prophet, the faithful husband. 


560 


The Prophet, the Funny Husband 


Many may imagine that the Prophet, Muhammad (pbuh) was 
decisive all the time, even with his wives. They may further sympathize 
with his wives for this reason. On the contrary, the Prophet was the 
kindest one towards his wives. He was comical when it was time for 
fun. He was also smiling and used to cuddle them. 


“Aisha, the Mother of the Believers (may Allah be 
pleased with her) said, "By Allah, I saw the 
Prophet (pbuh) standing at the door of my room 
screening me with his garment to enable me to 
watch the Abyssinians playing with speares in the 
mosque. I was placing my head between his ear 
and shoulder, and my face leaning to his cheek. 
Then he started to say, "O ‘Aisha, were not you 
satisfied?" I replied, "No" to know how dear I am 
to him. He said that repeatedly until I became 

satisfied." 
(Reported by Bukhari) 

In another version, 


"He was standing especially for me until | became 
bored and left. Therefore, you should treat the girl 
who is fond of amusement (providing that it is 
permissible)’ according to her age." 

The Prophet (pbuh) assigned some time for amusement with his 


wives. This was to make them enjoy their life and so as not to feel that 
the marital life they lead is boring and troublesome. 


‘Permissible amusement is only allowed in four cases (according to the Prophet’s 
hadith): (1) amusement with one’s wife (2) training one’s horse (3) walking between 
two targets (4) learning to swim. 


561 


‘Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) said, "Once I traveled with 
Allah's Messenger (pbuh) when I was young and not fat. Then, he asked 
his companions to go foreward and they did so. Afterwards he said, 
"Tet us trace each other." Therefore, I started to run until I won. Later on 
when I became fat and forgot what had happened, I traveled again with 
him, He asked his companions to go foreward and they did so. Then he 
said, "Let us race each other." I forgot what happened in the first race. I 
was fat therefore I said, "0 messenger of Allah, how could I race you in 
this case?” However, he said, "Let us race." Then, he won the race. He 
started to laugh and said, "This was opposite the last one." 


The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) would say to 
‘Aisha (may Allah be pleased with her): "I know 
when you become angry or pleased of me" She 
said, "I asked, how could you know that?" He said, 
"When you are pleased, you say , “No, by the lord 
of Muhammad” and when you are angry, you say, 
“ No, by the lord of Ibrahim” 
(Reported by Bukhari) 

One of the scholars said , “ Kind treatment with one’s wife does 
not mean not harming her. But it rather means to endure her harm and 
to be tolerant when she becomes angry, following the Prophet’s 
example the Prophet’s wives would argue with him. Moreover, they 
might abandon him until the night. Once, Umar’s wife (may Allah be 
pleased with him) argued with him. Thereby he said, do you argue with 
me!? Then, she said, the Prophet's wives (pbuh) would argue with him 
and he is better than you. 

This was the Prophet's style with his wives thus, we should, 
following the Prophet, be playfull with our wives to relieve them of the 
hardships of life and to enrich the love relationship towards them 


562 


The Prophet, the Strait Husband 


Although he (pbuh) treated his wives kindly, was funny with 
them and was patient towards their mistakes, he was also straight and 
decisive when the situation required it. Both tolerance and 
decisiveness are required in their due time and situation. 


Allah the Almighty addressed Muhammad (pbuh) by saying, 


reo coh Zor 3 »~ dt Gad Soke 3 Gath ARE ie 

gaudy Lisa dyno S35 os ol} gy igi Dace 
ws? oP pyre G4 Ae che ek wl ere 
wi) OY 5 oly (Gy) SLA a : aus Soe nee 


in 
ad 44 5 aed 


oe eel acl al ig aes Shay Aging 


Aye 


Gy) Cee 75 


[VA VA OleYh 


€O Prophet! Say to thy consorts: if it be that ye 

desire the life of this world, and its glitter then 

come! I will provide for your enjoyment and set you 

free in a handsome manner. But if ye seek Allah 

and His Messenger, and the Home of the Hereafter, 

verily Allah has prepared for the well-doers 

amongst you a great reward. } 
(Al-Ahzab: 28-29) 

The aforementioned verse was revealed when the Mothers of 
the Believers asked the Prophet (pbuh) for some ease and adornment. 
Accordingly, the Prophet (pbuh) got angry and swore that he would 
not approach them for a month. He therefore abandoned them all as a 
lesson for them. After that, Allah the Almighty revealed the 
aforementioned verses where they were told that they had no place in 


563 


the sacred household if they merely wished for ease or worldly 
glitter. If such were the case, they could be divorced and amply 
provided for. The Mothers of the Believer's however preferred Allah, 
His Messenger and the Last Day to the worldly glitter. They lived 
with the Prophet (pbuh) to carry out their great roles in the best way 
providing him with peacefulness happiness and cooperating with him 
in disseminating Islam all over the world. 


Let us read the details of one such story: Imam Muslim reported 
on the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah who said, "Once, Abu Bakr 
asked for the Prophet's permission to enter his home. He found some 
people sitting by the Prophet's door whom he (pbuh) did not permit 
to enter. Then, Abu Bakr asked for permission and the Prophet 
(pbuh) permitted him to enter. Then came “Umar who also entered 
after asking permission. There, he found the Prophet (pbuh) keeping 
silent and his wives sitting around him. Then Abu Bakr intended to 
say something in order to make the Prophet (pbuh) laugh. He said, 
"© Messenger of Allah, I would like you see the daughter of Khadija 
(when she asked me financial support then I twisted her neck. Then, 
the Prophet (pbuh) laughed and said, They are around me, as you 
see, asking me financial support. Thereupon, Abu Bakr held ‘Aisha 
and started to twist her neck, so did ‘Umar with Hafsa. They (Umar 
and Abu Bakr) said, "Do you ask the Prophet something he does not 
possess? They then said, by Allah we will never ask him anything he 
does not have." 


The Prophet abandoned them for a month. Then, the above 
verse was revealed upon him. Therefore, he started to speak with 
them. He spoke first to Aisha by saying: 


"Q ‘Aisha, I would like to offer you something but it is better to 
consult your parent and not to be rash. She asked, "What is this, 
Messenger of Allah (pbuh)?" He then recited the verse. She said, 
"Would I consult my parents concerning you? I would rather choose 
Allah, His Messenger and the Home of the Hereafter." She added, I 
would like you inform none of your wives with what you said. He 
said if any ane of them asked me I would tell her. Allah did not send 
me to be harsh but a teacher." 


564 


The Prophet made them choose and they choose what was 
good for them: they chose Allah, His Messenger and the Home 
of the last Day. 


It was also narrated that the Prophet's offer to his wives, i.e., to 
be divorced or to stay with him was after the Prophet had abandoned 
them for a month. Such separation was due to what Hafsa did: she 
disclosed the Prophet's secret to ‘Aisha. Afterwards, he was pleased 

_ with them. 


565 


The Prophet, the Faithful Husband 


In general faithfulness is an Islamic virtue. Allah the Almighty 
described His Holy Entity by faithfulness in many Qur'anic verses: 


25 a obits 5 tl <n EN al Gy hep 
Aor BL Se aby 7 AS 240 ge Arees 4g * 


3 a Ns Ss OIE oe g et Fea 


id & it 
(yecci sf <e . pe Gores oes Sy! aye 

4D 240 YN AS & AOS ok rae 
CYS sdagdy 


€Allah hath purchased of the believers their 
persons and their goods, for theirs (in return) is the 
Garden (of paradise): They fight in His cause, and 
slay and are slain: A promise binding on Him in 
Truth, Through the Torah, the Gospel, and the 
Qur'an: And who is more faithful to his covenant 
than Allah? Then rejoice in the bargain which ye 
have concluded: that is the achievement supreme. » 
(At-Tawbah: 111) 


Allah also described the believers with such a trait saying 


be iS Nass cae ES 6) ats aaa (he Sth 


poorer Fy rer 


«@) jal Gis 4 Ass St eo yh, Tae; 
pyy¥ ste JH 


«Those who fulfil the covenant of Allah and fail not 


in their plighted word 
-(Ar-Ra‘d: 22) 


566 


Allah, Exalted be He, also commanded His servants to take 
faithfulness as a shield, a fort and an adornment to their souls and 


manners by saying, 


iA Cre 4 et 


384 bss de opal = % Bagi (34 ai som a 
Och 015 BSE ja a 
(44 ideodh 


«Fulfil the covenant of Allah when ye have entered 
into it? 
(An-Nahl: 91) 


The Prophet (pbuh) set a great example to us in faithfulness and 
loyalty by being loyal to his wife, Khadija during her life and after her 


death. When Khadiya died, the Prophet (pbuh) kept her memory all his life. 
‘Aisha, the Mother of the Believers narrated, 


"Once an old woman visited the Prophet (pbuh) 
He asked her, "Who are you?" she_ replied, 
Juthama al-Mazniyya." "Thus, you are Hassanah! 
How are you!? And how do you do after us? The 
Prophet said. The woman said, "Well, I sacrifice 
you with my father and mother. When she left, 
‘Aisha asked him about the woman to know the 
reason for his hospitality towards that old woman? 
Then, the Prophet told her that she often used to 
visit us during the life of Khadija. He added, 
"Loyalty is of belief” 


‘Aisha (may Allah be pleased with her) also said, "I was never 
jealous of any of the Prophet's wives (pbuh) except Khadya I never saw 


her, but the Prophet (pbuh) kept remembering her. 


"Sometimes he used to slaughter a lamb, cut it up 
into. pieces, and distribute them as donations 
memory of Khadijh. Once I said, it seems to me 
that there is never existed any woman in this world 
except Khadija. Then, the Prophet (pbuh) would 


567 


say: she was so and so and she had given me 
offspring.” 
Another version reads, 


"Tl was never jealous of any of the Prophet's wives 
(pbuh) except Khadija because the Prophet 
frequently remembered her. One day, he 
remembered her, therefore I said, "What do you do 

with an old woman, and Allah favored you with 

someone better than her (meaning herself)?” The 

Prophet (pbuh) said, "No, by Allah! He does not 

give me a better one than her. She believed me 

while people disbelieved. When they called me a 

liar, she alone remained true. She enriched me 

when people deprived me. Allah has favored her 
with my offspring, and from nobody else." 

Such kind treatment to Khadija in her life and after her death 
indicates the Prophet's noble morals and loyalty. Although she was 
older than him and “Aisha was younger, beautiful and knowledgeable 
the Prophet kept loyal to her memory throughout his lifetime. 
Moreover, he did not marry again during her life. Then ‘Aisha said to 
herself, ‘Never shall I mention anything concerning this issue 
thereafter" Actually, such Prophetic behavior should be an example for 
all spouses all over the world. 


568 


Polygamy 


Under the title of confusing questions 2 woman wrote to Al-Ahram 
newspaper in March, 19,1999. She said, "What I write about is a very 
critical issue and needs to be solved since it is a public problem. She wrote 
the article in an interrogative style. She asked the following questions: 


1- What can a woman do after reaching forty years without a husband? 
Must she be driven into corruption or to delay marriage until she enter 
Paradise in the Hereafter? 


2- What can a divorced woman or a widow —_ (whether she has children 
or not) do? Why do men seeking marriage disregard her? Is it fair to let 
her Itve alone suppressing her desires along the life? 


3- Why does a wife enjoy her husband alone and forbids him to marry 
another? Does she own him? What will she do if she herself becomes a 
widow or a divorced? Would she accept that fate? Is there any one who 
can gaurantee that she will not suffer what we suffer? 


4- Is it permissible for a woman to have some medicine to suppress her 
desire of marriage? What is this kind of medicine? As for fasting, we 
know that it is a protection but it does not eradicate one's desire at all. 


Orientalists and their followers of Muslim, westerners, try to 
devote their efforts to demolish the tenets of Islam. They try to raise 
false accusations and doubts against the polygamy system in Islam. 
They try to make women believe in their false accusations. 


Therefore, they circulate that polygamy is only limited to Muslim 
societies and uncivilized peoples. 


They claim that the polygamy system is only established to fulfill 
men desires. It destroys the dignity of women and usurps their rights. 
Likewise, it demolishes the principle of equality between man and 
woman in which they should be devoted completely to each other. 


569 


Furthermore, they claim that polygamy creates grudge between a 
husband and wives as it does among wives themselves. It is also a 
source of dispute and grudge among the stepbrothers that leads to the 
spreading of anarchy, instability in the family life, and the immorality 
of the offspring. 

Let us now refute such ignorant and envious accusations. As a 
matter of fact, polygamy was prevalent before the advent of Islam in 
“many nations: the Israelites the Arabs the Indians, the Burhams, the 
Persians, the Zoroastrians the Athenians, the Chinese, the Babylonians, 
the Assyrians, the Egyptians, the German and the Saxons. 

In his book, "the woman in the Qur'an", ‘Abbas al- Aqqad said, 
"Before Islam, the social laws disregarded the rulings of marriage 
including polygamy. It was lawful for a man to marry whatever number 
of women he liked so long as he could afford them. Thus, the civil laws, 
before Islam permitted polygamy and the adoption of maids without limit." 


Judaism allowed unlimited polygamy. Nothing concerning the 
prohibition of polygamy was stated in Torah. All Prophets mentioned in 
the Torah had many wives. David and Solomon had hundreds of wives 


and maids. 


In Old Testament, it was states that Solomon "had loo wives and 
300 maids" 


It was stated also in the Torah, 


"Tsu went to Islamael and added the daughter of Ishmael son of 
Ibraham and sister of Niabut to his wives" 


Concerning Jacob, son of Isaac Torah stated, "Then he got up in 
this night and took his two wives, two maids and his eleven sons to 
cross Yabuk pool" 

Narrated Abu Huraira (may Allah be pleased with him): The 
Prophet (pbuh) said, 

"Tonight I wil go round (i.e. have sexual relations 
with) one hundred womaen (my wives) everyone of 
whom will delivr a male child who will fight in 
Allah's cause." On that an angel said to him, "Say: 

"if Allah wills." But Solomon did not say it and 


570 


forgot to say it. Then he had sexual relations with 
them but none of them delivered any child except 
one who delivered a half person. The Prophet 
(pbuh) said, If Allah wills," Allah would have 
fulfilled his (above) desire and that saying would 


have made him more hopeful." 
(Reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim) 


Hence, it turned out that Judaism allows polygamy. As for 
Christianity, there is no explicit text in the gospels prohibiting 
polygamy. Nevertheless, in some of Paul's epistles there is an indication 
that polygamy is lawful. He said, “it is obligatory for a bishop to have 
only one wife." (Paul's first Epistle to Timanun) 


To be obligatory for a bishop to have only one wife is an 
indication that other Christians are allowed to practice polygamy. 


It has been historically proven that some early Christians got 
marred to more than one wife. Among the early church fathers there 
were some who had many wives. 


In his book, "the Woman in the Glorious Qur'an", “Abbas al- 
“Aqgad said, "Waster Mark, an authentic historian on polygamy stated, 
"With the approval of the church, polygamy remained allowed until the 
seventeenth century. It was too common to be counted by the church 
and the state." 


Tt was well-known that Martin Luther, the evangelists leaders, was 
the first to codify polygamy. Furthermore, he protested against the 
renunciation of priests to marriage to such an extent that he left his 
priesthood aside and got married to a nun. All what he did was to draw 
a new way of thinking. It was stated that he would speak about 
polygamy on various occasions without objection. 


Contemporary Christianity admits unlimited polygamy in Africa 
for the Christian Africans. In his book "The Woman between Islamic 
law and Man-made laws", Mustafa as-Siba'i stated, "Christians in Africa 
depend on polygamy as a means to disseminate their mission. It is these 
missionaries, who said "it is not proper to penetrate in the social affairs of 
pagans, since paganism has been established among them, it is not prudent 
to prevent them from marrying many wives as long as they are Christians 


571 


who follow Christ's creed. Therefore, they have officially announced that it 
is lawful for African Christians to make unlimited polygamy." 


He (may Allah have mercy on him) also said, "Christians in the 
west have found that women started to outnumber men especially after 
the two world wars. They found themselves facing a serious social 
problem of the steady increase of women over men. Untill now, they 
are still helplessly trying to find a practical solution. It was among the 
suggested solutions to allow polygamy." 


In 1948, there was a conference for youth in Munich, Germany. 
The conference discussed the problem of the increase in the number of 
women over men after the war. 


Many solutions for this problem were examined by then. 
Eventually, the result which the conference recommended to solve the 
problem was polygamy. 


Some western thinkers praised the polygamy system and called 
for it as a solution to save the society and to give every woman her right 
to be a mother. Gustav Lubon in his book "Arab Civilization" says, 
"The principle of easter polygamy is a good system, which elevates 
the morals of the nations adopting it, strengthens the unity of the family 
and grants the women respect and happiness beyond the European 
woman's imagination." 

Al- Aqqad also stated, in his book "The woman in the Glorious 
Qur'an", some points of views of European philosophers concerning 
polygamy. He qouted Dr. Lebeau's statement "As a matter of fact, the 
European laws will, one day, allow polygamy. He also cited Ahranfil as 
saying, "Polygamy is needed to preserve the Arian progeny.” 

In the pre-Islamic period before Islam polygamy was unrestricted 
and unlimited. Abu Dawud related in his "Sunan" on the authority of al- 
Harith ibn Qays that he said, 


"T embraced Islam while I had eight wives. When I 
mentioned that to the Prophet (pbuh), he said 
"choose only four of them.” 


Tirmidhi reported in the authority of “Abdullah ibn “Umar (may Allah 
be pleased with them both), 


572 


Abu Ghaylan ibn Salama ath-Thaqafi embraced 
Islam and he had ten wives whom he married 
during the pre-Islamic period. His wives also 
embraced Islam with him. Thereupon, the Prophet 
(pbuh) commanded him to choose only four of 
them." 
Hence, we can conclude that the polygamy system is not only 
applicable to Islam but also to many nations before the advent of Islam, 


to all heavenly laws that were revealed before Islam and to Arabs in the 
pre-Islamic period. Allah the Almighty says in His Glorious book, 


glans sles 25h is Ni 3 ren 2 sid 


ee es ae 5 ee oa 
Fadl oll 25 5 ON 25 ¥ Gg 


(@ 


pés cogil 


«Do they not travel through the land, so that their 
hearts (and minds) may thus learn wisdom and 
their ears may thus learn to hear? Truly it is not 
the eyes that are blind, but the hearts which are in 
their breasts» 

(Al-Hajj:46) 


573 


Polygamy in Islam 


When Islam was revealed, polygamy was common among people. 
There might be one husband who had about ten wives. It was unlimited 
polygamy. Then came Islam to put a severe limit that could not be 
surpassed. A Muslim can have only four wives provided that he treats them 
fairly, otherwise he can only marry one or what he possesses of slave girls. 


In his book "In the Shades of Qur'an" Sayyid Qutb said, “Islam 
came to limit not to release and to restrict polygamy by justice not give 
free hand to man's desires." But, why does Islam allow polygamy? 
Islam is a fealistic system that matches human nature in all 
circumstances, time and place. It preserves the human hygiene and 
morals by fighting any kind of corruption or perversion. 


Thus, if we put such Islamic properties into consideration when 
dealing with the issue of polygamy, we would realize the rationale 
behind polygamy in Islam. 

First of all, we may face an increase in the number of women over 
men. That is a natural increase even at the time of peace. Thus how 
could we solve this problem? Is it enough to let the society treat itself 
according, to circumstances and chances? Therefore, we should have a 
principle that governs and treats such a problem. We have only three 
cases when women outnumber men: 


1- Either a man marries only one woman and leaves the others without 
marriage. 


2. Either a man has a woman in a legitimate marriage and another 
concubine or concubines. 


3- Or he has more than one in marriage. 


The first case is undoubtedly against the human nature. This is 
because a woman cannot live without a husband with whom she finds 
love and safety. Just as a man cannot only be satisfied with his financial 
and material progress so is a woman who is created to be a wife and a 
mother. Therefore a man and a woman are alike concerning the need to 
marriage. The second case is against righteousness and chastity. It also 
degrades a woman and strips her dignity. As for the third case, it is what 


574 


Islam recommends as a conditional dispensation to solve the problem of 
the shortage of men. 


Secondly, the fertility period of a man is longer than a woman. It 
may be 70 years for him and 50 for her there is no doubt that among the 
goals of the creation of man and woman is to populate the earth by 
reproduction. Therefore it is incredible not to make use of the man's 
fertility period that exceeds the woman's. It is not obligatory for every 
one to do that. But it is rather permissible to fulfil such an innate 
requirement. That is the nature of the Divine legislation which fits our 
nature. Unlike the man-made laws, this Divine legislation is a 
comprehensive system that tackles all probabilities of human life. 


We may find a husband leaning to fulfil his natural desire but his 
wife does not because of old age or sickness. They do not want to 
separate because of the long life they spent together. Thus, could we 
face such cases? Again we have also three probabilities for such case: 


1- To suppress the man and deprive him of fulfilling his natural desire 
to preserve a woman's dignity. 


2- To give him a free hand to commit adultery and have concubines. 
3- To allow polygamy in accordance with the circumstances he lives in. 


The first case is undoubtedly against the human nature and 
unbearable. The second case is against Islam and its good manners that 
aim to elevate the human life in order to be convenient to human beings 
whom Allah honored over animals. As for the third case, it is the only 
way to fullfil the natural requirements of human beings. It matches the 
moral Islamic precepts. It keeps the first wife in the shade of marriage 
so as not to lose the memoirs of her long life she led with her husband 
who still Joves her. 


A wife may be barren but her husband longs for a child. Such a 
person has only two alternatives: 


!- To divorce her in order to replace her with a women who can fullfil 
his desire. 


2- To marry another one in addition to his first wife. 


There is no doubt that the better choice for most women is the 
second one. A wise woman would surely prefer polygamy to helplessness. 


575 


As a matter of fact, even the barren woman wishes to be amused 
by children no matter how they come. 

Hence, we are now in a position that m 
Allah's saying, 


akes us understand 


ether wet oe FH ee NE LEE eee ae 
685 SB Ta Ge Sow UPS al EB I Aas psp 
id gt Ee eee en 
SA EXE G 5) seh ys Vi Bas Ob gus 


eX - 


ry isblh (| 


(WS Yi asl as 


@Marry women of your choice, two, or three, or 
four; But if ye fear that ye shall not able to deal 
justly (with them) then only, one - 

(An-Nisa:: 3) 


The permission of polygamy in the verse fullfils the natural 
desires and fights against the life of corruption. Whereas the restriction, 
mentioned in the verse, protects the marital life of anarchy and the wife 
of injustice or humiliation. 

The required justice mentioned in the above verse applies to 
material affairs such as in dewelling, clothes, food expenses, sleeping 


with and every thing a man can do. As for applying justice to human 
feelings, it is beyond man's will. This is represented in Allah's saying, 


GAC 442 oe vy osger * 2. Bix ee gyre 
£6 OE BN OG AES 13a og salle as J 
(VV A seletly 4@) C25 


éYe are never able to do justice between wives even 
if it is your ardent desire: But turn not away (from 
a woman) altogether, so as to leave her (as it were) 
hanging (in the air) if ye come to a friendly 
understanding, and practice self-restraint, Allah is 
Oft - Forgiving, Most Merciful. (An-Nisa’: 129) 


576 


However, some opinionated people cite the above verse as a proof 
for the prohibition of polygamy. Therefore, the Prophet (pbuh) 
illustrated the concept of justice in such case by saying, after treating 
his wives fairly, 


"O Allah! That is what can I do of justice among 
them. May you not blame me as regards what You 
possess and I do not possess (namely the heart)." 


Thus Islam introduced to polygamy such testrictions to make 
man think quietly and slowly lest he commits injustice which is 
forbidden by Islam. 


Some people claim that polygamy is against a woman's dignity 
and that it contradicts the principle of equality between man and 
woman. 


Those who circulate these false allegations are surely wrongful. 
Ibn al-Qayyim said, "Islam allows polygamy for a man, not a 
woman. This is due to Allah's wisdom, favors, and mercy, Exalted be 
He Whose law cannot be criticised or blemished. Had a woman 
married two men, there would have been cortuption in this world. 
Husbands will fight each other. Chains of ancestry will be confusing. 
Therefore, this is the wisdom behind polygamy in Islam." 


Before we move on we would like to declare that a woman is 
not obliged to accept a married man as a husband. She is completely 
free to agree or reject. In case she agrees, Islam guarantees all her 
nights, and dignifies her among the other wives. 


But what we see, nowadays, of the people's perversion when 
they misuse polygamy and in turn devastate the institution of 
marriage, it is beyond the pale of Islam. Sayid Qutb said, "Whenever 
a generation perverts and misuses this dispension, they do not 
represent Islam nor are their actions from Islamic precepts. They 
forsake Islam and do not realize its concepts, which call to purity. 
The reason behind this is that they live in a society where Islam does 
not govern nor does the sacred law dominate. 


Such a society is responsible for this anarchy and for adopting 
marriage as a brutal desire. Therefore, whoever wants to reform this 


S77 


case should call the people to Islam, sacred Law, purity 
righteousness and moderation. Whoever wants to reform the society 
should call people to the Islamic way of life. 


It is not enough to reform an aspect of life and leave others 
aside. Islam is a system that encompasses all aspects of life." 


578 


The Rationale Behind the Multiplying 
of the Prophet (pbuh) 


We have mentioned before that when the enemies of Islam 
failed to attack Islam scientifically, they resorted to conspiracy and 
false allegations. They did their best to defame the prophetic 
character, especially concerning his many wives. They claimed that 
he (pbuh) was lustful and egocentric. In addition to many false 
accusations concerning his marriage to Zaynab bint Jahsh (may 
Allah be pleased with her) and the story of the lie against * Aisha 
(may Allah be pleased with her). Thereby, we have to refute such 
allegations and show the world the real character of the Prophet 
(pbuh) who is infallible and beyond, worldly benefits.) What we are 
going to deal with can be summarized in the following points: 


I- Polygamy is not confined to the Prophet (pbuh) but it also applies 
to most earlier Prophets. 


2- The rationale behind the many wives of the Prophet (pbuh). 


579 


Earlier Prophets And Polygamy 


We have mentioned before that polygamy was common before 
Islam in general. But what we are dealing with now is the Prophets who 
made polygamy from among Israelites. 


(1) Ibrahim (pbuh) 

Ibrahim (pbuh) had three wives as stated in Torah and Gospel: 

(a) Hajar, the mother of Isma ‘il (pbuh) who is mentioned in Torah: 
"Hajar gave birth to a son of Ibralum. Ibrahim called him Islam‘il." 

(b) Sara, the mother of Ishaq (pbuh) who is mentioned in Torah: 


"Allah said to Ibrahim do not call your wife Saray but Sara. She 
will give birth to a boy who will be called Ishaq." 


(c) Qutura, the mother of Zamran, Baqshan, Mudan, Mudyan, Bashbaq 
and shuha, who is mentioned in Torah: 

"Then Ibrahim returned and took Qurtura in marriage who gave 
birth to Zamran, Baqshan, Muddan, Mudyah, Bashbaq and Shuh." 
(2) Ya qeub and his many wives (pbuh): 
Ya qub (pbuh) had four wives: 


(a) Lay‘ah, who gave birth to five sons and a daughter. They were: 
Ra ubin, Sham‘un, Lawi Yahudha, Zabulun and Dina. 

(b) Rahil, who give birth to two sons. Danan and Yusuf (pbuh). It is 
stated in Torah: 

"Allah mentioned Rahil, listened to her and opened her womb. Then she 
became pregnant and gave birth to a son. She said, Allah removed my 
shame. She called him Yusuf and asked Allah for another son. Dana is 
the name of Yusuf's brother, Benyamin. 

(c) Zilfah was the mother of Jada and Ashir as stated in the following 
text of Torah: 


580 


“When Lay'ah realized that she could give birth any more, she gave 
Zilfah, her maid to Ya'qub in marriage. Then the latter gave birth to 
Jada and Ashir." 


(d) Balihad was the mother of Naftali, Rahil's maid, who was given to 
Ya‘cub in marriage by Rahil as stated in Torah, "Then she (Rahil) then 
Ya qub married her. After she had become pregnant, she gave birth to 
Naftali." 


(3) Moses (pbuh) 
Moses (pbuh) had three wives: 


(a) Safurah was one of the girls whose flocks Moses watered for them. 
Then he married her and she give birth to Jarshum. 


(6) The Kushian woman as stated in Torah: 


"Maryam and Harun talked with each other abont the Kushian woman 
whom Moses got married." 


(c) The daughter of al-Qeeny, it was mentioned in Torah that Moses 
got married to one of the Qeeny tribe. 


(4) David's wives (pbuh) 
David (pbuh) had nine wives, we are going to refer to some of them: 


(a) Mikal, the daughter of Shawul. It was stated in Torah that Shawul 
gave David his daughter, Mikal in marriage. 


(b) Abijah was Nabal's wife. When her husband died, David sent for 
marrying her. She at once rode on her donkey accompanied by five 
maids and followed David's messengers. She became David's wife. 


(c) Akhinu'am al-Bazra ‘iliyyah: It was stated in Troah: 


"David spent with his two wives: Akhinu'am al-Barza ‘illiyyah and 
Abyal al-Karbaliyyah, Nabal's wife in Akheesh house." 


(d) Ma‘kah, the daughter of Tilmey 
(e) ajeeth. 
(f) Abital. 
(g) Aglah 


581 


(e) After David (pbuh) had come from Habrun and become the king of 
Israel, he adopted a number of maids and wives from Jerusalem as 


stated in Torah: 


"David also adopted some maids and wives, from Jerusalem after he had 
come from Habrun. There, he was blessed by sons and daughters. The 
names of his sons and daughters who where born in Jerusalem were: 


"Shamsnaw, Shubab, Nathan, Sulaiman, Yajar, El-Yashuw', 
Natig, Yafee’ Al-Yasham', Al-Bida' and Al-Yaflut." 
(5) Solomon's wives (pbuh) 


As for Solomon, Allah's Prophet (pbuh), it was stated in Torah that 
he had got seven hundred wives and three hundred maids: 


"Solomon had got seven hundred wives and three hundred 


maids." 


582 


Polygamy in Christianity 


All Muslims Christians and Jews believe that Jesus’ (pbuh) 
Messengership confirmed Moses’. It did not contradict Moses' 
mission as stated in the gospel of Mathew: 


"Do not think that I was sent to demolish the revelation or the 
prophets. I just came to complete not to demolish." 


We can understand that Juesus confirmed the former legislation 
including polygamy. There is not any prohibiting statement for 
polygamy in all gospels. Furthermore, it is stated in the Epistles of 
Mathew that polygamy is permissible. When Polus was asked about 
the credibility conditions of the bishops and priests, he said, "A 
bishop should have only one woman in marriage." It is apparent that 
other than clergymen may marry whatever number of women they 
like. Therefore, many earlier Christians married more than one 
woman. Relying on such a concept, Napoleon the king of France got 
married to another woman in the presence of the Pope who did not 
reject him. 


Eventually, we can conclude that all prophets made polygamy 
without vitiating the duties or purposes of their Prophethood. 
Amazingly, we may find some Jewish or Christian orientalists who 
criticize and accuse the Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) for making 
polygamy and neglect that polygamy is also the tradition of the 
prophets whom they follow. 


Let us now discuss the rationale behind the multiplying of the 
wives of the Prophet. But first of all, we would like to draw the 
attention of the reader that what we are going to discuss is 
completely different from what we have mentioned at the beginning 
of the book. Initially, we dicussed the stories of the Prophet's wives 
to follow their examples. We are now going to indicate the reasons 
and rationale behind adopting such number of wives. 


583 


The Rational behind the Multiplying 
of the Prophet's Wives 


In the very beginning we should bear in mind that polygamy was 
common before Islam. In addition to that, the Prophet (pbuh) had more 
than one wife is Madina when he became old. Having mentioned these 
two facts let us shed the light on the rationale of polygamy in the 
Prophet's life (pbuh) and the circumstances, which had led to that. 


(1) Khadija bint Khuwailid 


She was the first of the Prophet's wives. The Prophet (pbuh) was 
twenty-five when he married Khadija who was forty by then. She was 
widow when he married her and they lived twenty-five years together. 
The Prophet did not marry any other women during her life. 


Hence we can conclude that the Prophet's marriage was void of 
any lust or desire. He was famous of good and noble character. Had he 
wanted to marry any beautiful and virgin woman, she would have 
accepted him. However, all what he wanted was purity and chastity. 


(2) Sawdah bint Zam‘ah 


Shortly after Khadija's death, Abu Talib, the Prophet's uncle died. 
The Prophet, therefore, became alone without company. He needed 
someone with whom he can find repose. Thereby, he got married to 
Sawdah bint Zam‘ah (may Allah be pleased with her). She was among 
the emigrant believers. 


When Sawda's husband, as-Sakran died, she feared to return to her 
family lest they put her in torture and convert her. Being mformed 
about her case, the Prophet (pbuh) offered to marry her in order to 
defend her. Moreover, he wanted to honor her and her husband for their 
strong faith and their immigration in the cause of Allah. She was fifty- 
five by then. All people admired and were amazed by this marriage. The 
Prophet married this solitary and poor widow to be an example before all 
people to put before their eyes the noble goals behind marriage. 


584 


‘Aisha bint Abu Bakr 


She was the only virgin woman whom the Prophet married. She 

mine years old when the Prophet (pbuh) married her. By such a 
met age, the Prophet (pbuh) consolidated the bonds of friendship with 
\ln1 Bakr. He abolished the Pre-Islamic system of brotherhood. In the 
pr-Islamic period, the people were accustomed to befriending one 
another to the extent that they behaved like brothers by blood. 
Therefore, they could not marry the daughters of whom they befriended 
and took as brothers. Thus, when Khawla went to Abu Bakr and 
betrothed ‘Aisha to the Prophet (pbuh), he wondered, “Could ‘Aisha be 
lawful to him while she was his brother's daughter? Then Khawlah went 
back to the Prophet (pbuh) and told him what had happened. 
Accordingly, the Prophet (pbuh) said, 


"Tell him, "You are my brother in Islam and your 
daughter is lawful to me.” 


By such marriage, ‘Aisha became the most knowledgeable of 
Muslim women in Sacred Law, religion, and Islamic Behavior, having 
married the Prophet (pbuh) in the second year after the Hijra, becoming 
the dearest of his wives to him in Medina. She related 2,210 hadiths 
from Prophet (pbuh), and after his death, leading figures of the 
companions would come and ask her for legal opinions, which she 
would supply. What a great rationale behind such marriage! 

(4) Hafsa bin “Umar ibn Al-Khattab 

Hafsa was the widow of Khanis Ibn Hudhafah. he was among the 
early immigrants to Abyssinia and fought in the battle of Badr. He died 
in Madina due to wounds he received in the Battle of Uhud. Then 
“Umar offered to Abu Bakr and ‘Uthman to marry his daughter, Hafsa, 
but they apologized. Accordingly, ‘Umar complained to the Prophet 
(pbuh) and he (pbuh) said, 

"Hafsa will get married to someone who is better 

than Uthman, and Uthman will get married to 

someone who is better than Hafsa." 

Then, the Prophet (pbuh) married Hafsa to give equal honour to 


both Abu Bakr and “Umar. Nothing might be more desirable on the part 
of the Prophet (pbuh) to offer Abu Bakr and ‘Umar as a reward for their 


585 


truthful sincerity and their sacrifices for the sake of Islam more than 
marriying their dearest daughters. How noble was the Prophet's attitude 
towards ‘Umar, whoever thinks of the Prophet's marriage to Hafsa will 
realize that this marriage was not out of lust or desire. 


(5) Zainab bint Khuzaimah 


She was the widow of Ubaidah Ibn al-Harith (may Allah be 
pleased with him), who was martyred at the battle of Badr. She was 
sixty when her husband died. Thus she needed some kind of care. 
Accordingly, the Prophet, after he came to know about her condition, 
married her to join her to the other mothers of believers. But she died 
shortly after the Prophet (pbuh) had married her. It is said that she 
stayed two years or two months with him. It is said also that the period, 
which she lived with the Prophet, was just eight or three months. As a 
whole, she was the only wife of the Prophet (pbuh) who died during the 
Prophet's lifetime but after Khadya. 


(6) Umm Salama 


She was the first Muslim woman to immigrate to Abyssinia. She 
had been married to ‘Abdullha Ibn “Abd al-Asad who was martyered 
the battle of Uhud. When he died, Umm Salama was sixty-five by then. 
She had two boys and two girls. There was none who would suffice her 
after the death of her husband. Therefore, the Prophet (pbuh) betrothed 
her for himself. She first apologized to the Prophet (pbuh) because of 
her old age, her orphans and the jealousy she had. But the Prophet 
(pbuh) said "I am older than you and as for jealousy I will supplicate 
Allah to remove it from you and the orphans will be to Allah and His 
Messenger (pbuh). This is the wisdom behind such marriage: to looke 
after a widow and her orphan kids. 


(7) Zaynab bint Jahsh 


She was the Prophet's cousin. The Prophet (pbuh) gave his son by 
adoption, Zayd, Zaynab in marriage. Adoption was one of prevalent 
tradition in the pre-Islamic period. The adopted was treated as a real 
son. He had the same rights of inheritance and he was prohibited of to 
marry the wives of his adopter. 


Zayd's marriage with the Prophet's cousin Zaynab bint Johsh did 
not turn out happy. Zaynab the high-born, looked down upon Zayd the 


586 


freedman who had been a slave. And he was not comely to look at. 
Both were good people in their own way, and both loved the Prophet 
(pbuh), but there was mutual incompatibility and this is fatal to married 
life. Zayd wished to divorce her, but the Prophet (pbuh) asked him to 
hold his hand, and he obeyed. But when it became impossible to live 
with each other, then Zayd divorced her. 


The pagan superstition and taboo about adopted sons had to be 
destroyed as Allah willed) Therefore, Allah the Almighty commanded 
His Messenger (pbuh) 


To marry Zaynab even though the people would circulate that 
Muhammad got married to his son's wife. Thereupon Allah said, 


G4 rend os 


oy Sie OU Se i Sc ie re 
M22 ISU AG Sol BB at HG OLE g 
36> Seb FES YS Ses es 

CO Si HAG 1S He 5S 0 ell SS 


(PY hj Dh 


«than didst fear the people, but it is more fitting 

that than shouldst. Fear Allah. Then when Zayd 

had dissolved (his marriage) with her We joined 

her in marriage to thee: in order that (in future) 

there may be no difficulty to the believers in (the 

matter of) marriage with the wives of their adopted 

sons, when the latter have dissolved (their 

marriage) with them. And Allah's command must 

be fulfilled » 

(Al-Ahzab: 37) 

What was aimed behind the Prophet's marriage to Zaynab was to 
destroy the superstitions of erecting false relationships to the detriment 
or loss of true blood relations. 


587 


(8) Juwairiya bint al-Harith 


She had been married to one of the severest opponent to Islam and 
the Messenger of Allah, who was killed during the battle of Banu al- 
Mustalag. Then, Juwairiyah was taken as a prisoner of War. She was 
under Thabit Ibn Qays who wrote a contract for her emancipation. She 
went to the Prophet (pbuh) asking his help. But the prophet (pbuh) said, 
"Would you like something what is better than emancipation? She 
asked, "What is that?" The Prophet replied, "I pay your debt on your 
behalf and marry you.” she answered, "Yes, Messenger of Allah." Then 
the Prophet said, "I have done that." 


No sooner did the Prophet (pbuh) declare his marriage to 
Juwairiya than the companions of the Prophet (pbuh) came with her 
tribe and set them free saying: "These prisoners are the Prophet's 
relatives by marriage." “Aisha said, "When the Prophet (pbuh) married 
Juwairiya, when they (Muslims) set free about a hundred families of her 
tribe. Thus, there is no other woman, as I think, who blessed her tribe 
greater than her. Then all her people embraced Islam willingly. That was 
the rationale behind such marriage: to disseminate the word of Allah all 
over the world and to multiply the Muslims and the helpers of Islam. 


(9) Umm Habiba bint Abu Sufyan 


She was the widow of Ubaidellah Ibn Jahsh with whom she 
immigrated to Abyssinia to escape torture and pressure her belief. There 
her husband converted to Christianity and left her alone where he died 
soon after. She was perplexed and did not know where should she go: to 
Makka where her family who might convert her or to stay alone without 
a supporter abroad? 


Then the Prophet (pbuh) sent to Negus, the king of Abyssian to 
give him Umm Habiba in marriage. Then, she agreed in overwhelming 
happiness. That was the rationale behind such a marriage: to honor this 
patient woman, to protect her of trials in religion and to please the 
hearts of her family. 


(10) Safiyya bint Huyay ibn Akhtab 


She was a daughter of the leader of Banu Quraidhah. She was 
taken as a prisoner of war after the murder of her husband in the battle 


588 


of Khaybar. When she was brought to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), 
he said to her, "Your father was a great Jewish enemy to me until Allah 
slayed him." She replied, "Allah says in His Book, 


ic 4 See > 4 4 oA 

vee 4% v~ 4 be Goa be De br ot re 

: Yh nti de LSS 5 et 2) 399 gol wl el 
Ae 


vag | ot EEE ey Rete et cra AR eC 
Rpieapeyece te SS Der SS AF AI dy “agl 3 VG 


ra £2 
(Ve : ally (00) 


® 


€"No bearer of burdens can bear the burden of 
another." 2 
(Al-An‘am: 164) 

Then the Prophet (pbuh) gave her choice: either to set her free 
to be his wife or to return her to her family. She said, "O Messenger 
of Allah, I liked Islam and believed you before you had invited me. 
Moreover, I have nothing in Judaism, no father or brother, you gave 
me a choice between disbelief and Islam. Allah and His Messenger 
are more beloved to me than return to my tribe." Then the Prophet 
married her and made her emancipation as her dowry. 


However, the main reason for this marriage was the keenness 
of the Prophet (pbuh) for Jewish people to embrace Islam, or at least 
to abate their enmity against it. 


(11) Maymuna bint al-Harith 


She was the widow of Abu Ruham Ibn ‘Abdel ‘Uzza. She was 
the last wife the Prophet (pbuh) married. The motivation behind this 
marriage was that the Prophet (pbuh) wanted to attract the people's 
hearts to Islam. Maymuna had many relatives and kin in Banu 
Hashim and Banu Makhzum. 


Having mentioned the reasons and the circumstances that led to 
multiplying the Prophet's wives let us sum up these goals so that they 
are easy to understand: 


589 


(1) Spreading education among women. The situation required that 
some women should take the charge of guiding and teaching other 
women especially in feminine matters which they may have felt too shy 
to ask the Prophet (pbuh) about, such as marriage affairs, menstruation, 
postnatal childbirth and information about punification. 


(2) Perfection of the legislation: Such as the nullification of the 
superstition of adoption which was prevalent in the pre-Islamic period. 
It gave much time to the Muslims to transmit the Prophet's sayings and 
traditions. Thus, it was mentioned that the Prophet's wives narrated 
what exceeded three thousand hadiths. 


(3) Social solidarity: 

By marriage, the Prophet (pbuh) also consolidated the bonds of 
friendship with his companions. 

(4) Political Aims: 

The Prophet also gained the support of the leaders of the tribes from 
whom he married. Furthermore, they willingly embraced Islam. 

(5) Humanitarian purposes: 


It was also a mercy to those old women who could not find care or 
shelter for themselves and for their orphans after they had lost their 
husbands. 


(6) Setting an excellent example for all Muslims, men and women. This 
was represented in the Prophet's good treatment to his wives, 
implementing justice among them and enduring their anger tenderly. 


These are the most important reasons that led the Prophet (pbuh) to 
practice polygamy. 


590 


The Prophet's Daughters 


Zaynab 


Rugqayyah 


Umm Kulthum 


Fatima 


591 


Zaynab 


She was born ten years before the Prophet's Messengership. She 
was the eldest child of Prophet from Khadija bint Khuwailid (may 
Allah be pleased with her). She was brought up in the Prophet's 
house under the patronage of the mast honorable parents: 
Muhammad, the Prophet and Khadija the mistress of all women. 
Therefore, Zaynab became an example of good manners. 


No sooner did Zanynab reach the age of puberty than she was 
betrothed by her cousin from the maternal side, Abu Al-As Ibn or- 
Rabee’ who was an eminent master of the people of Quraish. From 
the paternal side Abu al-As belonged to ‘Abd Manaf ibn Qusai, the 
Prophet's grandfather and from the maternal side he belonged to 
Khuwailid, Khadija's father. 


Therefore, Abu al-As and Zaynab were well acquainted with 
each other. Both of them knew how descent the other was. They 
married and led a happy marital life Then, she gave birth to two 
boys: Ali and Umamah. 


Oneday when Abu al-As was traveling for trade, there 
happened the greatest event in the life of the humanity. Muhammad 
(pbuh) was sent as a Messenger to all world. Zaynab, at once, 
responded to the call of truth which was revealed upon her father and 
embraced Islam. Having returned from his journey, he knew that his 
wife had accepted the new faith unexpectedly, she failed to convince 
him to embrace the religion of truth. 


He justified his refusal by saying, "By Allah, I trust in your 
father but I fear that they might circulate that I left my father's 
religion to please my wife." 


Zaynab was shocked by the disbelief of her husband. She stayed 
in her husband's home alone. Her mother died and her father and 
sisters left to Madina. 

| 


592 


Afterwards, in the battle of Badr Abu al-'As was taken as a 
prisoner of war. The Prophet (pbuh) recommended the Muslims to 
treat the prisoners kindly. Meanwhile, Zaynab sent some money and 
a necklace to ransom her husband. It was her wedding present from 
her mother. No sooner did the Prophet (pbuh) see this necklace than 
he remembered earnestly his loyal wife, Khadija. 


Thereupon, after a long period of pause the Prophet (pbuh) said, 
"If you would like to release her prisoner and repay her money, you 
could do so." They all said, "Yes, Messenger of Allah." Then, the 
Prophet (pbuh) took a pledge from Abu al-As to release Zaynab 
because Islam put a barrier between them." 


Having returned to Makka, he was received by his wife with a 
great joy. But he was very sad. He told her that he came to bid 
farewel to her. Zanyab sadly asked, "Where and why are you going?" 
He replied, "You not me. I promised your father to return you to 
him, because Islam put a barrier between us and I never broke a 
promise." 


Zaynab set out from Makka to Madina but some people from 
the Quraish tribe obstructed her. They terrified her until she fell off 
her camel while she was pregnant. She had a miscarriage. She went 
back to Makka under the shelter of Abu al- As. When she recovered, 
he took her accompanied with his brother, Kinana ibn ar-Rabei until 
he brought her to the Prophet (pbuh). 


As years passed, Zaynab lived with her father in Madina hoping 
that Allah open the heart of Abu al-'As to Islam. After six years, 
Abu al-As knocked Zaynab's door. She did not believe her eyes 
when she found him at her door. She was about to approach him for 
greeting but she stopped suddenly to check his belief. 


All of sudden, Abu al-‘As said, I did not come to Madina as a 
warrior but as a merchant. Nevertheless, a squad belonging to your 
father obstructed us and robbed my caravan as spoil of war. But I 
managed to escape. I came to you seeking your intercession on the 
part of Muslims. Zaynab said, welcome my cousin, welcome father 
of Ali and Umama. She went forward to the Prophet (pbuh) after he 


593 


had performed the dawn prayer. She shouted, "O people, I patroniz 
Abu al- As Ibn ar-Rabie’." 


Thereupon the Prophet "pbuh) went out and said, "O people 
did you hear what I heard?" They replied, "Yes, Messenger o 
Allah." Then, he said, 


"By Whom in Whose Hand is Muhammad's soul I 
had not known anything about that before I heard 
what you heard. Muslims are one party against 
others. They permit the patronage of any one of 
them, however lower. Thus, we patronize whoever 
she patronized." 


Then, the Messenger of Allah went to his daughter's home and 
said, "Be hospitable towards him but do not be alone with him since 
you are not lawful to him." 

Zaynab asked her father (pbuh) to give Abu al-’As his property 
back. Accordingly, the Prophet (pbuh) went to his companions and 
said, "you know this man, whose property you took. I would like to 
give him back his property. But if you do not like to do that, it will 
be your booty given to you by Allah." Then, they all replied, "We 
would like to give it back, Messenger of Allah." 

Afterwards, Abu al-As bid farewell to Zanyab and set out for 
Makka. Having arrived there with his prosperous caravan, he began 
to give back what he had taken from people. Then, he stood and 
shouted, "O people of Quraish, is there any one who indebts me?" 
They replied, no, you are loyal and generous. Then, he said, "I testify 
that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of 
Allah. By Allah, I was about to embrace Islam before that time, but I 
feared that you might say that he wanted to misappropriate our 
property. But when Allah helped me give it back to you I embraced 
Islam." 


Accordingly, Abu al--As went forward to Madina to join the 
Muslim community. There the Prophet (pbuh) returned Zaynab to 
him. The spouse met again and continued living in happinness and 
felecity under the shade of an unblemished belief: 


594 


A year later, Zaynab died affected by her fall from the previous 
year when she was about to emigrate for Madina but Quraish 
obstructed her. Abu al-As became so sad that he caused the people at 
her funeral to weep. Then came the Prophet (pbuh), her father to bid 
farewell to her. He said to the women, "Wash her thrice or five times 
and let the last wash be mixed with comphor and tell me when you 
finish." Having washed her, he prayed over her (my Allah have 
mercy on Zaynab, daughter of the Messenger of Allah). 


595 


Ruqayya 


Ruqayyah was born after Zaynab. She was soon followed by Umm 
Kulthum. Therefore, they were brought up together. When Rugqayyah 
and Umm Kulthum grew, they were betrothed to ‘Abdel- Uzza ibn 
‘ Abdel-Muttalib's (Abu Lahab) two sons: “Utbah and * Utaibah. 


Muhammad (pbuh) was not a Messenger by then. He accepted 
their proposal but he asked them first to give him a time to consult his 
family and his two daughters. Khadija kept silent lest she might annoy 
her husband. The two girls kept also silent out of shyness. Thereby, 
they concluded their betrothal. x 

No sooner was Muhammad sent as a Messenger and began to call 
for the religion of truth than the people of Quraish gathered together to 
conspire against the Prophet (pbuh). One of them said, "You took 
charge of Muhammad's responsibilities. You have, on the contrary, to 
return his daughters to him. Accordingly, Abu Lahab said, to his two 
sons, “I will deprive you of my fatherhood, if you do not divorce 
Muhammad's two daughters." Thereby, they divorced the two girls 
before the consumation of marriage. Furthermore, Abu Lahab and his 
wife Umm Jamil began to bring harm to the Prophet (pbuh) to the extent 
that they entailed Allah's curse and wrath. Allah the Almighty says, 


225 ig AO PR Boe a ae ger EE Se Sts tS 
CD) Le CG WE ae el ce pene eer ren 
44 Moe. Dd be ee LE ee 20 4 Foe 
oh, Bob 6 fas 
: FR Go ar 
fo AN deadly (oe) e ee 


«Perish the hands of the father of flame! Perish he! 
No profit to him from all his wealth, and all his 
gains! Burnt soon will he be in a Fire of blazing 
Flame! His wife shall carry the (crackling) wood 
as fuel! A twisted rope of palm-leaf fibre round her 
(own) neck!» (Al-Masad: 1-5) 


596 


However, the Prophet and his daughters did not bother about what 
they faced of hardships because they knew well the nature of the new 
faith. As usual, what the disbeliever's make of tricks always go in vain. 
In addition to bemg saved from living with Abu Lahab's son, she got 
married to one of the first eight people to enter Islam: 


“Uthman Ibn ‘Affan Ibn Abu al--As Ibn Umayyah Ibn ‘Abd 
Shams who was also one of the ten informed people to enter Paradise. 


When the people of Quraish increased their torture against the 
Muslims, the Prophet (pbuh) permitted his companions, to immigrate to 
Abyssinia. 

“Uthman and his wife were among the immigrants to Abyssinia, 
although they recently married. They lived there peacefully hoping to 
return to Makka to be in the vicinity of the Prophet (pbuh) and his 
companions. 


As soon as they heard that Hamzah and ‘Umar had embraced 
Islam, they preferred to go back. When they went home, they again 
faced the atheists’ persecution. In addition to that, Ruqqayyah was 
surprised by the death of her mother, Khadija (may Alalh be pleased 
with her). 


The Prophet, then, decreed mass migration to Madina. Ruqayyah 
accompanied by her husband were amongst the immigrants to Madina. 
There, she gave birth to a child called ‘Abdullah. But the child died 


soon after. 
Rugayyah had a fatal fever and ‘Uthman stayed at home nursing 


her. Then the battle of Badr occurred but the Prophet gave permission 
to ‘Uthman to stay home to nurse Rugayyah. 


The disease was so fatal that she passed away as a patient and an 
immigrant wife. May Allah have mercy on her. 


597 


Fatima az-Zahra' 


She was Fatima az-Zahra bint Muhammad (pbuh). She was the 
fourth daughter of the Prophet (pbuh). She was born to the Prophet 
(pbuh) and his wife (Khadija) five years before the Prophethood of her 
father ie., eighteen years, before the Hira With Maryam (Isa's 
mother), Khadija, Asiyah (Pharoh's wife), Fatima was the purest and 
best of womenkind. 


She (May Allah be pleased with her) was brought up in the 
Prophet's home. Thus, she acquired the good manners of her parents. 
When she was five years there happened a great change in her father's 
life, he was sent as a Messenger to all of mankind. She felt, in the very 
early years of her life, that she should shoulder burdens of the new faith 
with her father. She suffered a lot of hardships and troubles because of 
the atheists’ tricks done to her father. Among the severe troubles that 
she faced was the siege in the valley of Abu Talib where she suffered 
the pain of hunger and thirst side by side with her father and Muslims. 


No sooner did she get rid of such siege than she was afflicted by 
the death of her mother, Khadija (may Allah be pleased with her). 
However, she stood by her father, the noble Prophet to compensate him 
for the loss of her mother. 


After the Prophet (pbuh) had decreed the mass migration, she and 
her sister, Umm Kulthum stayed at Makka until the Prophet sent a 
companion to bring them. She was eighteen years by then. Many great 
companions betrothed her, like Abu Bakr and ‘Umar but the Prophet 
(pbuh) kindly apologized. Then came Ali Ibn Abu Talib to betroth her. 
The Prophet (pbuh) gave her to Ali in marriage when she was eighteen 
years old. Ali had nothing to pay as dowry but a shield, which was the 
Prophet's gift to him. 

Ali sold his shield to ‘Uthman in return for four hundred and 
seventy dirhams, in order to give the price as a dowry to the Prophet 
(pbuh). Then the Prophet paid the dowry to Bilal in order to buy some 
perfume and give the rest to Umm Salama to buy the bride's luggage. 


598 


Afterwards, the Prophet (pbuh) invited his companions and made 
the wedding banquet. After Isha’ prayer, the Prophet went to the bride 
and her groom. He asked for water. Then he made ablution and poured 
the water upon them. He said, 


"O. Allah, may you bless them, make blessing be 
upon them and bless their offspring." 


A year later, Fatima gave birth to the first grandson to the Prophet 
(pbuh), Al-Hasan Ibn “Ali in the third year after Hijra. The Prophet 
(pbuh) was pleased and uttered adhan (call to prayer) in his ear. He also 
chewed a date and rubbed the newborn mouth. He called him al-Hasan, 
shaved his hair and gave away in charity silver equal to the weight of 
the hair. A year later, Fatima gave birth to al-Hussain in the fourth year 
of Hyra. The Prophet (pbuh) was very, sentimentally, close to Al- 
Hassan and his brother al-Hussain. 


When Allah the Almighty revealed, 


eta code SA og ey cts ser ye ot are 
opal Caaly Yl Ages! Ge as Ys oe 3 353 


fe call C4 es Filion eas acae ni 
re led) GD ls Sas ect Gh cay 


€And Allah only wishes to remove all abomination 

from your, ye Members of the Family, and to make 

you pure and spotless. » 

(al-Ahzab: 33) 

Once, the Prophet (pbuh) was at Umm Salama home. He called 
Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Hussain and covered them with garment, 
saying, 

"O Allah! Those are my household. O Allah! May 

you remove all abomination from them and make 

them pure and spotless." He repeated it thrice. 

Then, he said) "O Allah! May You make Your 


599 


prayers and blessings be upon the household of 
Ibrahim You are praiseworthy and Glorious." 


In the fifth of Hijra, Fatima and ‘Ali were blessed by a girl whom 
the Prophet (pbuh), her grandfather, called Zaynab. Two years later, 
Fatima gave birth to a girl whom the Prophet also called Umm 
Kulthum. 

Hence, Allah the Almighty blessed Fatima with extending the 
Prophet's (Pbuh) offspring. When the Prophet (pbuh) returned from a 
journey he used to pray two rak’ats in the mosque and then visit Fatima 
before his wives. Aisha, the mother of the believers said, 

"Tl have never seen someone who is like the Prophet 

(pbuh) in speech than Fatima. He is used to kissing 

her when she comes and so does she." Once the 

Prophet expressed his love to her while he was on 

a minbar; he said, "Fatima is a part of me; 
whoever annoys her annoys me." 

And it was stated in another version that the Prophet (pbuh) said, 


"katima is a part of me, whatever annoys her 
annoys me and whatever harms her harms me." 
(Reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim) 

However, the Prophet (pbuh) drew the attention of his beloved daughter 
and others to the necessity of righteous deeds. One day he called, 

"QO people of Quraish buy yourselves. I could not 

benefit you in the part of Allah O Fatima bint 

Muhammad ask me whatever you want of my Property, 

I could not benefit you on the part of Allah." 


In another version it stated, 
"© Fatima bint Muhammad save yourself from the 
Hell-fire. It is not in my power to cause you harm 


or to bring you benefit beyond Allah's will." 
(Reported by al-Bukhari) 


600 


Thawban related that the Prophet (pbuh), once, entered Fatima's 
home accompanied with me. She was wearing a necklace of gold. She 
said, this was Abul-Hassan's gift to me. Then, the Prophet (pbuh) said, 

“Fatima! Would you like it to be said: "This was 
Fatima bint Muhammad, having a necklace of fire?” 
He severely rebuked and blamed her. Then he left. 
Subsequently, Fatima sold the necklace and bought 
by its price a maid slave and freed her. When the 
Prophet (pbuh) knew what she had done, he said, 
"Praise be to Allah Who saved Fatima from Hell-fire." 
(Reported by an-Nasa'i) 

More than that he threatened her if she committed a theft, he would 
cut off her hand as mentioned in the Hadith conceming the Makhzumi 
woman who committed a theft and whose people then had Usama Ibn 
Zayd intercede for her in the part of the Prophet (pbuh). Thereupon, the 
Prophet (pbuh) said, 


"By Allah had Fatima bint Muhammad committed 


a theft, I would have cut off her hand." 
(Reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim) 


Furthermore, despite the Prophet's love of Fatima, he would prefer 
the poor and the needy to her. When Ali realized that Fatima got tired, 
he offered her to ask the Prophet (pbuh) a maid. She said I would do so 
by Allah's willing. When she approached the Prophet (pbuh), he 
welcomed her and asked, “Why did you come, my daughter? She 
replied, I just come to greet you. She was so shy that she could not ask 
him what she wanted. Then, she went again to the Prophet (pbuh) 
accompanied by Ali, Ali explained Fatima's problem before, the 
Prophet (pbuh). Thereupon the Prophet (pbuh) said, 

"No by Allah, I would not give you and leave aside 

the people of Suffa (some poor people) starving. 

But rather I would sell and then support them. 

Having gone back home, the Prophet (pbuh) visited 

them and asked, "Would you like something better 
than you wanted?" They replied, "yes". He said, "It 


601 


is a few words delivered by Jibreel: to glorify Allah 
(i.e., subhana Allah) ten times at the end of every 
prayer, to praise Allah (i.e. Alhamadu lillah) ten 
times and magnify Allah (i.e Allahu Akhar) ten 
times. When going to bed glorify Allah thirty three 
times, praise Him thirty-three and magnify Him 
thirty-three. That is better than a servant." 


Hence, Ali said, "By Allah I did not cease reciting them, since I 
knew them from the Prophet (pbuh). A man asked, "Even in the night of 
the battle of Saffayn?” Ali replied, "Even in the night of Saffayn. 

Fatima (May Allah be pleased with her) passed many trials and 
hardships of life. She was afflicted by the death of her mother and her 
sisters, Rugayyah, Zaynab and Umm Kulthum successively. She also 
endured the life of poverty and want patiently. However, she did not 
surrender to sadness or disappointment. 


Moreover, after the Prophet (pbuh) had performed the Farewell 
pilgrimage and completed the tenets of Islam, he got sick. She went 
forward to visit him at * Aisha's home (may Allah be pleased with her). 

He welcomed her and then whispered in her ears that she wept 
vehemently. Noticing her impatience, he (pbuh) whispered again in her 
ears that she laughed. Therefore ‘Aisha (May Allah be pleased with her) 
asked Fatima, "Why do you weep, although you are the only one to 
whom the Prophet whispered? Afterwards when the Prophet (pbuh) left 
she asked her, "What did the Prophet (pbuh) tell you?" Fatima replied, 
"T could not disclose the prophet's (pbuh) secret." 


When the Prophet (pbuh) died. She (Aisha) said, "Would you 
please tell me what the Prophet (pbuh) whispered to you? Fatima said, 
"Now I can." As for the first time he whispered to me, he (pbuh) said, 


"Tibreel used to reiterate the Glorious Qur'an with 
me once a year, but at that time he reiterated it 
twice. Thus I think that I am about to die. You 
should, therefore, fear Allah and patient. [ am your 
best predecessor." Accordingly, I wept. But when 


602 


he noticed my impatience, he whispered, "Fatima, 
would you like to be the mistress of the women in 
paradise, and the first of my family to die after 
me?" then I smiled. 

As the Prophet's (pbuh) disease grew more serious and painful, 


Fatima grew furious and sad. During the death trials of the Prophet (pbuh), 
she said, "What a distress is engulfing my father? The Prophet (pbuh) said, 


"No distress would engulf your father anymore." 


When the Prophet (pbuh) died she said, "O father, you responded 
to Your Lord. O father, heaven is your haven. O father to Jibreel we, 
console you" 

After the Prophet (pbuh) had been buried she addressed Anas, "O 
Anas, how could you willingly hurl the earth over the Messenger of 
Allah (pbuh)?" Then sOhe wept and so did all Muslims. Meanwhile, 
they remembered Allah's ae 


i aa ee eee 


oe abe oe eo Ae yer ey ey are aes er ae) 


ee ee ee as mach fe Alisl 


oe 


[YEE cole JH é@® yea Sal Srey 


Muhammad is no more than a Messenger. Many 
were the Messengers that passed away before him. 8 


(Al-Imran: 144) 
4G) 44d és Ga ch TN yh os Lbs 3 
(we let 
«We granted not to any man before thee permanent 


life (Here) if then thou shouldn't die, would they 
live permanently? » 
(Al-Anbia': 34) 
Six months later, Fatima fell ill. Then she soon died to fulfill the 
Prophet's prophecy. She was twenty-seven by then. May Allah have 
mercy on her. 


603 


Umm Kulthum 


She (May Allah be pleased with her) was born shortly after 
Rugayyah. Therefore, they were brought together like twins. When they 
became matured, they were betrothed to Abu Lahab's two sons: “Utbah 
and ‘Utaibah, But this marriage was not concluded by Allah's willing. 
Thus, Allah preserved them of living with the enemy of Allah and his wife. 


Rugayyah got soon married to ‘Uthman (may Allah be pleased 
with them both) and migrated together to Abyssinia. Umm Kulthum 
stayed home shouldering the burdens of life with her mother, Khadya 
and relieving her father's grieves because of the atheist's rejection. 


Meanwhile, the people of Quraish decided to boycott Muslims and 
Banu Hashim as well. They suffered an economical and social siege in 
the valley of Abu Talib for three years. There, Umm Kulthum suffered 
a lot like all other Muslims. She endured the afflictions of the siege and 
the pains of hunger all the time side by side with her father and the 
whole Muslim community. 


Meanwhile, she shouldered the responsibility of her family 
because of the sickness of her mother and she was the eldest of her 
sisters. Shortly after the end of that wrongful boycott, Khdija's disease 
grew fatal, and died. Umm Kulthum became responsible for the Prophet 
household affairs. 


Later on, when the people of Quraish felt that all their tricks went 
in vain they decided to assassinate the Prophet (pbuh). Thereupon, the 
Prophet (pbuh) decreed mass immigration to Madina. He and Abu Bakr 
migrated together leaving his two daughters Umm Kulthum and Fatima 
in Makka. Having arrived at Madina, he sent Zayd Ibn Haritha to bring 
his daughters from Makka. 


In Madina, Umm Kulthum led a life of happiness and victory after 
the Muslims had defeated Quraish. All of sudden, her sister, Rugayyah, 
Uthman's wife died. Afterwards, she noticed that Uthman kept giving 
frequent visits to the Prophet (pbuh) seeking patience and consolation. 


604 


One day, ‘Umar Ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with 
him) came enraged with angry. He was annoyed of Abu Bakr and 
Uthman became they refused his offer of inanyine his daughter 
Hafsa. The Prophet (pbuh) said to him, 


"Hafsa will get married to someone who is better than 

‘Uthman and ‘Uthman will get married to someone who 

is better than Hafsa." 

(Reported by al-Bukhari) 

Then, the Prophet (pbuh) gave ‘Uthman, Umm Kulthum in 
marriage. Thereby ‘Uthman was called (Zu-Nurayn) the possessor of 
the two lights because he married two daughters of the Prophet 
(pbuh). 


Umm Kulthum lived in her husband's house for six years. She 
witnessed the great victories of the prophet (pbuh) and the Muslims. 
After the great conquest of Makka, she wanted to visit her mother's 
tomb there. But she died soon and was burried next to her sister 
Rugayyah. May Allah have mercy on her. 


605 


The Prophet As A Father and / 
or A Grandfather 


In the pre-Islamic period, the pagan Arabs hated to have 
daughters. They used to bury female children alive. There were only 
two evil choices to decide on: either to keep a girl as a thing of 
sufferance and contempt, brining disgrace on the family or to get rid of 
her by burying her alive. They believed that sons were only the source 
of strength and prosperity, but daughters only made them subject to 
humiliating raids. A striking example of such belief was represented by 
‘Abdul-Muttalib when he swore that if he had got ten boys, he would 
have slain one of them as a sacrifice to Allah. 


Meanwhile, the Prophet (pbuh) had four daughters and two sons. 
The two sons soon died young. The a thiests of Quraish rented their 
personal spite and venom against the noble Prophet (pbuh) by taunting 
him with the loss of his two infant sons by Khadya. Furthermore, 
someone said, leave him alone, he would die without leaving a 
successor. 

Accordingly Allah the Almighty revealed the surah of at-Takathur 
to give a warning against boast and rivalry concerning acquisitiveness 
of whatever kind, of wealth or offspring. Allah also revealed the surah 
of al-Kawthar to rebuke the disbeliveers who taunted the Prophet with 
the loss of his sons. Allah the Almighty says, 


cre Shook BS 


(a) 655 332% @ oe A) S ae Ry 


- 


cy -d : siSd 


éThe mutual rivalry for piling up (the good things 
of this world) diverts you (from the more serious 
things), until ye visit the graves. But nay, ye soon 


shall know (the reality). 
(At-Takathur: 1-3) 


606 


The Prophet As A Kind Father 


Parents are created loving their children. They give them great 
concern, affection and care. Without such an innate love, the parents 
might not keep patient to rear their children. Those who do not love 
their children are surly odd people. Children need love and care to be 
brought up in a wholesome manner. 

The Prophet (pbuh) set a great example in rearing his children. He 
treated them kindly and affectionately. ‘Aisha (may Allah be pleased 
with her) said, 

"Once, a nomad came to the Prophet (pbuh) and 

said, "You kiss your children but we do not. The 

Prophet (pbuh) said, "What should I do with you if 

Allah stripped mercy from your heart!?" 

(Reported by Al-Bukhari) 

Abu Hurairah (may Allah be pleased with him) also related, 


"Once the Prophet (pbuh) kissed al-Hassan Ibn Ali 
before al-Aqra Ibn Habis at-Tamimi. Al-Aqra’ 
wondered, "I have ten children but I have never 
kissed any one of them." Then the Prophet (pbuh) 
looked at him and said, "Whoever does not have 
mercy on people, Allah does not have mercy on him." 
(Reported by Al-Bukhari) 
Whenever Fatima (may Allah be pleased with her) enters the 
Prophet's room, he used to welcome her tenderly and kiss her. 


Such a love is not consecrated for his daughters only but also for 
his grandsons and the whole Muslim children. Al-Bukhari reported that 
Usama Ibn Zayd Ibn Haritha related that the Prophet (pbuh) would hold 


607 


me and let me sit on one of his knees and al-Hassan on the other. Then 


he hugged us and said, 


"Q Allah may You have mercy on them both 
because I have mercy on them." 
(Reported by Al-Bukhari) 


Barida (may Allah be pleased with him) related, 
(©) BOLT a oe eae Bee. Kai, BAR 74 
(Qo) Ake Al ere aly acd 3, SA Typ 
[VO sgpladly 


€"One day, the Prophet (pbuh) was delivering a 
speech when al-Hassan and al-Hussain came 
joggling and falling in their red shirts until the 
Prophet (pbuh) get off and carried them up. Then 
he said Allah the Ever Truthful said, (Your riches 
and your children may be but a trial. - 
(At-Taghabun: 15) 
When I noticed these two boys walking and falling I 
could not keep patient until I interrupted my speech 
and carried them up." 
(Reported by at-Tirmidhi) 
Al-Bukhari also reported on the authority of Abu Qutalah that 
he said, 
"Once the Prophet went out carrying Umamah 
bint Abu al-As on his noble shoulder. Then he 
started to pray while she was still on his shoulder. 
When kneeling, he placed her and when raising he 
hoisted her." 
(Reported by al-Bukhari) 


The Prophet (pbuh) would also protrude his tongue to Al-Hassan 
Ibn Ali who in tum would notice the redness of the Prophet (pbuh) 
tongue and then hurry to him. When visiting his companions of the 


608 


- Helpers, he would be surrounded by children then he would supplicate 
Allah for them, wipe their heads and greet them. 
All of these acts express the prophet's kind treatment and love 


towards children. Eventually, let us conclude this aspect of the prophet's 
life by the following astonishing account. 


In Sahih Al-Bukhari, it is reported on the authority of Anas Ibn 
Malik (may Allah be pleased with him) that, 


"The Prophet (pbuh) entered upon his son, 
Ibrahim, while he was dying. Thereupon, the eyes 
of the Prophet (pbuh) started to shed tears. “Abdur- 
Rahman ibn ‘Awf said to him, "You too, Messenger 
of Allah!" The Prophet (pbuh) commented. "O ibn 
Awf, it is a mercy and repeated it twice and said, 
"The eyes shed tears, the heart is grieved, but we 
do not say anything except what pleases Allah and 
Jor your death we are very sad, O Ibrahim." 
(Reported by Al-Bukhari) 
When having a newbom child, the Prophet set a good example by 
slaughtering an animal to celebrate his birth. Likewise, he was also an 
example of patient father when his son died. 


609 


The Prophet As 
A Serious Father 


In addition to being kind and affectionate towards his children, he 
was also a serious one when noticing any mistake or a danger engulfing 
them. For example, when the Prophet (pbuh) noticed his daughter. 
Fatima wearing a necklace of gold he got angry and did not greet her as 
usual. He advised her by saying, 

"Would you like to be said that the daughter of 

Allah's Messenger wore a necklace of gold. Then 

the Prophet (pbuh) left her and went out. 
Accordingly, Fatima sent it to the market to be sold 
and then bought a slave and freed him. When the 
Prophet knew that he said, "Praise be to Allah who 


saved Fatima from the fire.” 

(Reported by an-Nasa’t) 

In the hadith concerning the Mukhzumi woman who committed a 
theft, the Prophet had a serious and severe attitude. No intermediary, 
however noble even if the issue concerns the nearest people to him, can 
intercede to abolish or relieve a punishment ordained by Allah. The 
Prophet (pbuh) rebuked the intercessor, Usama Ibn Zayd, his beloved 
companion by saying, 

"Do you intercede to vitiate a punishment leglized 
by Allah. Then he started to deliver a speech. He 
said, "O people, those who lived before you would 
only punish the weak when committing a theft and 
leave the noble. By Allah, had Fatima bint 
Muhmmad committed a theft, I would have cut off 


her hand." 
(Reported by al-Bukhar1) 


Sahabiyyat 


611 


Asma’ Bint Abu Bakr 


She was the mother of ‘Abdullha ibn az-Zubair and the daughter 
of the first Muslim man to enter Islam after the Prophet (pbuh), Abu 
Bakr as-Siddiq. She was also the elder sister of ‘Aisha, the mother of 
the believers (may Allah be pleased with her). She was the seventeenth 
person to enter Islam. She gave pledge to the Prophet (pbuh) and firmly 
believed in him. 

She was of a deep-rooted faith that she refused to receive her 
atheist mother, Qateelah or to accept her gift. Al-Bukhari and Muslim 
reported, 


"Asma' bint Bakr (may Allah be pleased with her) 
once asked the Prophet (pbuh), "My mother came 
to me while she was an atheist during the lifetime 
of the Prophet (pbuh) I asked him about her. I said, 
"My mother came willingly to me. Would I keep 
good ties with her? He replied, "Yes, keep good ties 
with your mother." 
(Reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim) 


She (may Allah be pleased with her) was called the possessor of 
the two scarves because she split her scarf into two parts in order to 
deliver food and water to the Prophet (pbuh) and her father, Abu Bakr 
in the Thawr cave when immigrating to Madina. 

When the Prophet (pbuh) set out for Madina accompanied by 
Asma's father, the latter took all what he had of property and left 
nothing to his family. 

Then Abu Quhafa, her grandfather came to her and said, "this man 
put you in adversity. He deprived you of himself and property. Asma’ 
bravely replied, "No, he he left so much to us." She covered some 
stones and brought them to her blind grand father and said, "This is 


612 


what he left." Thereby, the old man said, "There is no blame if left 
that." By such device she reassured the old man. 


Before the Prophet (pbuh) immigrated to Madina, the enemies had 
plotted for his life. He had already sent his followers to Madina. Ali Ibn 
Abu Talib had volunteered to face his enemies in his house. His single 
companion, as we know, was Abu Bakr. They two concealed 
themselves in the cave of Thawr three miles from Makka, for three 
nights, with the enemy prowling around in great numbers in fruitless 
search of them. Asma’, the daughter of Abu Bakr provided them with 
food and water during their stay there. 


Abu Jahl came furious and enraged with anger to enforce Asma’ 
to tell him the hidden place of her father. But she kept silent and 
faced him bravely. 


Failing to make her confess, he slapped her so violently that 
her necklace fell down. Then he had nothing to do but to leave 
enraged with anger. 

Asma’ soon joined the Muslim community at Madina No sooner 
did she arrive there than she gave birth to her son, Abullah, the first 
newborn in Islam. 

At the beginning of her marital life she was so poor that she had to 
serve her husband, Az-Zubair ibn al-Awwam, bake the bread, clean the 
home and feed the horse. 


Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr (may Allah with her): 


When Az-Zubair married me, he had not real 
property or anything else except a camel, which 
drew water from the well, and his horse. I used to 
Jeed his horse with fodder and drew water and sew 
the bucket for drawing it, and prepare the dough, 
but I did not know how to bake bread So our 
Ansari neighbouress used to bake bread jor me, 
and they were honorable ladies. I used to carry the 
date stones on my head from Zubair's land to him 
by Alla's Messenger and this land was two third 


613 


Farsakh (about two miles) from my house. One 
day, while I was coming with the date stones on my 
head, I met Allah's Messenger along with some 

Ansari people. He called me and then, (directing 

his camel to kneel down) said, "Ikh! Ikh!" so as to 

make me ride behind him (on his camel). I felt siny 

to travel with the men and remembered Az-Zubair 

and his sense of Ghira, for he had the greatest 

sense of Ghira of all the people. Allah's Messenger 

(pbuh) noticed that I felt shy, so he proceeded. I 

came to Az-Zubair and said, "I met Allah's 

Messenger (pbuh) while I was carrying a load of 

date stones on my, and he had some companions 

with him. He made his camel kneel down so that I 

might ride, but I felt shy in his presence and 

remembered your sense of Ghira on that Az-Zubair 
said, "By Allah, your carrying the date-stones (and 

you being seen by the Prophet (pbuh) in such a 

state) is more shameful to me than your riding with 

him." (1 continued serving in this way) untill Abu 

Bakr sent me a srevant to look after the horse, 

whereupon I felt as if he had set me free." 

Later on Za-Zubayr became a wealthy man. His property was sold 
after his death for about forty million dirhams. She was so generous that 
when felling ill she would wait until she recovered and then free her 
slaves. 

She took part in the battle of Yarmuk and fought bravely. She 
also kept a dagger to defend herself when thieves appeared in Madina at 
the time of Sa'id Ibn Al-* As. 

As for her fortitude, it can be represented in her words to her son, 
‘Abdullah when consulting her about Al-Hajjaj siege to Makka. She 


was a hundred years old and was blind by then. ‘Abdullah addressed 
her saying, "O mother, the people abandoned me; only a few of them 


614 


who still support me. However, they could no longer fight than an hour 
on my part." 


The other party offers to give me whatever I ask of worldly 
benefits. What do you see, mother? She replied, "You know yourself 
best. If you realized that you are right and calling for the truth, you 
would better go on. It is the issue for which your fellows passed away. 
Do not surrender your neck to Banu Umayyah to play it. But if you just 
wanted a worldly benefit you would be the worst man who demolished 
himself and his fellows. ‘Abdullah said, "By Allah, this is also my 
opinion, mother." But I fear to suffer crucifixion after death." She 
replied, "Skinning a slaughtered goat does not bring it pain." Off you go 
and seek Allah's help." 


When approaching to embrace him she found him wearing 
a shield. She said, "This is not the behavior of whoever wants what 


you want!" 


Therefore, he took off his shield and went forward to fight. He 
kept fighting until he was killed. Al-Hajjaj issued a command to have 
him crucified. Then he came to Asma’ and said, "O mother, the leader 
of the believer commended me to treat you well. Do you want any 
thing. She replied, "I am not your mother. I am only the mother of this 
crucified man." Then she said, I heard the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) as 
saying, "There will be in Thageef a liar and a destroyer." We knew the 
liar and there still you the destroyer. 

In another version when Al-Hajjaj came to Asma' (may allah be 


pleased with her) he said, "How did I punish your son, Asma!?" She 
replied quietly, “You spoiled his life but he spoiled your next." 


She (May Allah be pleased with her) died in Makka shortly after 
the death of her son, “Abdullah. May Allah have mercy on her. 


615 


Fatima Bint al-Khattab 


She was Fatima bint al-Khattab Ibn Nufail Ibn ‘Abd al-'Uzza she 
was of the noble women. She faced the harshest enemy of Islam and 
tured him to a great model. Fatima was brought up in the house of 
Al-Khattab ibn Nufayl al-Makhzumi, one of the noble and elite 
house of Quraish. 


When she became young, Said, Ibn Zayd married her. Said 
embraced Islam at the hands of the honorable companion, Khabbab Ibn 
al-Arat (may Allah be pleased with him) who took him to declare the 
testification of faith the Prophet (pbuh) Sa‘id went back to his wife 
Fatima and told her about the new faith. She was impressed and 
no sooner did he finish his speech than she uttered the testification 
of faith as well. 


Khabbab used to pay frequent visits to them in order to teach them 
the Glorious Qur'an and the tenets of Islam. They concealed their belief 
lest they might be put into torture especially at the hands of ‘Umar, who 
meditated eradicating Islam and slaying the Prophet (pbuh). 


One day, he went out carrying his sword towards the house of Al- 
Argam where the Prophet teaching his companions. Someone asked 
him, "Where are you going, ‘Umar? Why do you carry your sword? 
‘Umar replied, "I am going to kill Muhammad who dispersed us and 
insulted our gods. 


The man said, "Do you think that Banu ‘Abd Manaf (The Prophet 
family) would allow you doing that without taking vengeance. The 
man, then, suggested to him that instead of killing Muhammad, it is 
better to reform his kin. He suggested to him that there were near 
relations of his that had embraced Islam: his sister Fatima and her 
husband Sa‘id Ibn Zayd. Enraged with anger, he went forward to them 
meditating to slay them. When ‘Umar went to their house, he heard 
them reciting some words he did not understand. All of sudden, he 


616 


rushed into their house calling loudly upon his sister. Khabbab, who 
was teaching them at that time immediately, hid himself. Fatima 
concealed the copy from which they read. ‘Umar, then asked, "What 
was the murmuring I heard? 


They replied, "Nothing." ‘Umar said, I heard that you followed 
Muhammad." He then attacked his sister and her husband, but they bore 
the attack with exemplary patience, and declared their faith. He 
punched his sister so violently that she bled. 


‘Umar was so struck with their sincerity and fortitude that he 
asked to see the leaf from which they had been reading. Fatima refused 
and said, "You are impure. You have first to do ablution." Having done 
ablution and read the copy, his soul was touched, the leaf contained 
some portion of the surah of Ta-Ha Having read up to Allah's saying, 


a a > 4h BOM at ee ge Saeed LES. 3g 
«@) ay eh Fela Gadd 361 aan eal 

[Vo :4b] 

éFor every soul to receive its reward by the 

measure of its endeavor. - 

(Ta-Ha: 15) 

He commented, "What an honorable words!" Upon hearing 
‘Umar's comment, Khabbab Ibn al-Arat appeared from his hidden 
placed saying, O ‘Umar, I hope that the Prophet's supplication be 
answered as he invoked to Allah saying, "O Allah! May you support 


Islam with the closest one to you either Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham or ‘Umar 
Ibn al-Khattab. The latter was the closest one." 


‘Umar went foreward to the Prophet (pbuh) to utter the 
testification of faith before him and to join the Muslim community, He 
not only came into the faith but also became one of its strongest 
supporters and champion. It was Fatima who confronted ‘Umar and 
changed the course of his life. May Allah be pleased with her. 


617 


Umm Kulthum bint 
Ali Ibn Abu Talib 


She was Umm Kulthum bint Ali ibn Abu Talib. She was the 
daughter of Fatima, the best of the womankind and the mistress 
of women in paradise. Her grandfather was the Prophet (pbuh) and 
her brothers were the masters of youths in Paradise, al-Hassan and 
al-Hussain. 


She was born and brought up among those noble kin who 
molded her to be an example of piety, and righteousness. ‘Umar Ibn 
al-Khattab betrothed her but Ali (may Allah be pleased with him) 
disagreed because of her young age. However, he longed for 
marrying her by saying, "give me her in marriage, Abu Al-Hassan 
since I can appreciate her, no one else can treat her like me." 
Thereby, Ali agreed. He consummated the marriage with her in the 
month of Dhu-Qi'dah, 17 AH. She gave birth to Zayd Ibn ‘Umar and 
Rugayyah Ibn “Umar. 


Once, ‘Umar went out as usual to check the people, when he 
was the leader of the believers. He heard a woman cry coming out 
from a hut where a man standing at its door. ‘Umar greeted the man 
and asked where he came from? The man said that he was a nomad 
and came to get something from the leader of the believers. ‘Umar 
asked him about the woman cry he heard. The man said, "Off you go 
(may Allah have mercy on you) and do not be nosy." 


The man did not know who the questioner was? ‘Umar longed 
to ask and offered his help if it was possible. The man said, it was 
my wife giving birth and there was no one to help her. ‘Umar went 
home and said to his wife, "Would you like to gain a reward from 
Allah? She asked, him pleasantly, what this reward was. Having told 
her, she soon went to the woman carrying what she might need in 


618 


this situation. ‘Umar also carried a pot full of oil and grains and 
accompanied his wife to the hut. 


Umm Kulthum got inside the hut to help the woman whereas, 
the leader of the believers sat down with the man cooking outside. 
When the woman gave birth Umm Kulthum called upon her 
husband, O the leader of the believers tell your companion that Allah 
blessed him with a boy. The nomad got amazed when hearing the 
title of the man cooking and plowing in the fire. The woman also 
was surprised when knowing that the midwife who looked after her 
was the wife of the leader of the believers. May Allah have mercy on 
Umm Kulthum, the Muslim midwife. 


619 


Safiyya Bint ~Abd Al-MutTalib 


She was Safiyya bint “Abdel-Muttalib ibn Hashim ibn “Abd 
Manaf, the Prophet's aunt, the sister of Hamzah ibn ‘Abdel-Muttalib 
and the mother of Az-Zubair ibn Al- Awwam. She (may Allah be 
pleased with her) was brought up in a noble house which was 
responsible for drinking the pilgrims. 


Such nobility and deep-rooted lineage influenced the character 
of Safiyya (may Allah be pleased with her). She was eloquent, 
educated, brave and knight. She was among the first to enter Islam. 
She migrated with her husband to Madina. 


She joined the Muslim army at Uhud to treat the wounded and 
serve the warriors. When the Muslims started to withdraw from the 
battlefield, she held an arrow and waved it against their faces saying, 
"Would you leave the Prophet (pbuh) alone"*! 


When she knew that her brother Hamzah ibn ‘Abd al-MutTalib 
had been killed from his back and was disfigured after death, she 
kept patient and steadfast. "To Allah we are destined to return" was 
her only comment. She then asked Allah to forgive him. 


She had another heroic action in the battle of the Trench. When 
a Jewish man attempted to attach the women camp. The Muslim 
women and children at the battle of the Trench were left at a fort 
guarded by Hassan ibn Thabit (may Allah be pleased with him). 
Watching the Jewish man walking around the fort, Safiyya at once 
went to Hassan and said, "I doubt that man, since he might lead the 
enemy to us; you have to kill him." Hassan replied, "May Allah 
forgive you, I could not do that". 


Accordingly, she decided to get rid of that Jewish man alone. 
She veiled herself, picked up a huge cudgel and went down the fort. 
All of sudden, she hit the Jewish man on the back of his head several 
times until he died. Then she went back to the fort pleasantly 


620 


because she managed to protect the Muslim women by killing the 
Jewish spy. 

In the battle of khabybar, she went with the other Muslim 
women to encourage the Muslim army and to treat the wounded. The 
Prophet (pbuh) admired their contribution and assigned them a share 
of war spoils. 

Safiyya, as a matter of fact, led a life of sacrifice and 
achievements until she died at the era of ‘Umar ibn Al-Khattab (may 
Allah be pleased with him). She was about seventy by then. May 
Allah have mercy on her. 


621 


Sumayya bint khayyat 


She was Sumayya bint khayyat, the servant of Abu Hudhayfa ibn 
al-Mughira. She got married to Yassir, one of the immigrants to Makka. 
Because he was an immigrant, Yassir had the feeling of alienation. 
Therefore, he resorted to Abu hudhayfa seeking sponsorship. Abu 
Hudhayfa in turn gave him his female servant, Sumayya in marnage. 
They soon give birth to ‘Ammar and ‘Ubaidellah. 


When ‘Ammar grew up, he knew about the new faith, he embraced 
Islam after a long period of meditation. He went home to clarify what 
he heard from the Prophet (pbuh) to his parents. At once, Yassir and 
Sumayya embraced Islam Sumayya was the seventh person to enter 
Islam. Here started the climax of Sumayya's story. “Ammar and the 
members of his family did not keep their belief secret. Banu Makhzum 
knew that they had adopted the new faith. Thereby, they put them mto 
severe torture to convert them. They started to take them all, Yassir, 
Sumayya and “Ammar, to the buming desert of Makka, where they 
would pour upon them different kind of severe torture. However, 
Sumayya maintained a firm stance. 


The Prophet (pbuh) used to go where they were tortured, 
commending their fortitude and heroism by saying« 


"Keep patient, Yassir's family. Verily, your meeting 
place will be in Paradise”. 


Upon hearing the Prophet's (pbuh) saying, Sumayya proudly 
recited, "I testify that you are the Messenger of Allah and that your 
promise is truthful." She did not bother about death so long as it was in 
the cause of Allah. Verily she tasted the joys of belief and witnessed 
Allah's reward by the eyes of her heart that belittle all what she met. 
Although her husband, Yassir passed away before her eyes, the tyrant 
atheists failed to convert her. Eventually, Abu Jahl stabbed her with his 
spear to be the first female martyr in Islam. May Allah have mercy on 
Sumayya the symbol of sacrifice and fortitude. 


622 


Asma! Bint Yazid [bn As-Sakan 


She was Asma’ bint yazid ibn as-Sakan, who was from the 
Helpers (Ansar). Asma! was called the preacher of women because 
she was eloquent, rational and religious. She was an ideal Muslim 
woman. She was among the Muslim women who came to the 
Prophet to give the pledge of Islam. Such a pledge was mentioned in 
the glorious Qur'an. Allah the Almighty says, 


GES ah OA ol & ae Lay Jey Lat Gp 
a“ ay es oF -2 


o 7% roe ar Zee 4% ca 40 Ghee 5 2 qe eee - 
OGd! oe Aapw Ghet osh Y, cAadj) Gla YG SG GS 
ice Z age Se tc ete Ste ey, Sor a Soo A ge ee 
al | ail oh aol, Seal Gye Gg SE YY Suits 


= 


[VY sdrcally 4@) ts) bees 


¢O Prophet when believing women come to thee to 

take the oath of fealty to thee, that they will not 

associate in worship any other thing whatever with 

Allah, that they will not steal, that they will not 

commit adultery (or fornication), that they will not 

kill their children, that they will not utter slander, 

intentionally forging falsehood, and that they will 

not disobey thee in any just matter, then do thou 

receive their fealty, and pray to Allah for the 

forgiveness (of their sins): for Allah is Oft- 

Forgiving, Most Merciful. 9 

(Al-Mumtahana: 12) 

Having given the pledge she was curious to know every thing 

about Islam. She kept listening to the Prophet's sayings and asking 


623 


him about some rulings concerning the Muslim woman. She was the 
one who asked the Prophet (pbuh (about the rulings of menstruation. 


She was, therefore, the representative of women when asking 
the Prophet (pbuh) about any women affairs. Once, she came to him 
and said, "O Messenger of Allah. I stand for a group of women who 
are of my opinion. To proceed, Allah the Almighty has sent you to 
both men and women. Then we believed and followed you. We 
women are confined to homes, target to men's lusts, and bearers to 
their children. Yet, men have the privilege to attend Friday prayers, 
funerals and to fight in the cause of Allah. On the other hand, in case 
of fighting, we keep their property and rear their children. Would we 
share them in Allah's reward? Then, the Prophet looked to his 
companions and asked, "Have you ever heard a good question from a 
woman about religion like that? They replied, "You are right, 
Messenger of Allah." He said, "Go back Asma’ and tell all women 
you stand for that treating one's husband kindly, seeking his consent 
and obeying him are equal to all what you have mentioned 
concerning men." 


Asma' was looking forward to fighting in the cause of Allah. 
Not until the battle of Yarmuk did this aim take place. She was 
among women who were at the back of Muslim warriors. She would 
block the way against whomever escaping from the battlefield until 
she made him return. She also provided the warriors with food and 
water and treated the wounded as well. 


After this heroic life of knowledge and fighting in the cause of 
Allah, Asma’ died in 30 AH (may Allah have mercy on her. 


624 


Umm Salim bint Malhan 


She was called ar-Rumaisa’ Umm Salim bint Malhan ibn Khalid 
ibn Zayd ibn an-Najjar. She got married to her cousin, Malik ibn an- 
Nadr. She was amongst the earlier Muslims to embrace Islam. She 
adhered to Islam although her husband, Malik rejected and did his best 


to convert her. 


She started to instruct her son, Anas to say the testification of 
faith: "There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of 
Allah. The son repeated what her mother said but the atheist father said 
to Umm Salim. "Do not spoil my kid." She replied, "I do not spoil him 
but I would rather educate him". 


Malik grew furious and remained an atheist. Furthermore, he 
decided to leave his home forever unless she converted. No sooner did 
he leave the house than he was killed at the hands of one of his enemy. 


Umm Anas devoted her life for bringing up the child after the 
death of his father. Later on she went to the Prophet (pbuh) offering him 
her son, Anas to be his servant she was pleased when the Prophet 
agreed accepted Anas as his servant. 


Abu Talha made a proposal to marry Umm Salim. He offered a 
precious gift as a dowry but she refused since he was still an atheist. 
She kindly refused him saying, "No one can reject the like of you Abu 
Talha. But you are an atheist and I am a Muslim. I am not allowed to 
marry an atheist one” She added "I want nothing but Islam." He asked, 
"who can guide me to that? She answered. "The Prophet (pbuh)." 
Thereupon the Prophet said, "Abu Talah came with the mark of Islam 
between his eyes." Another version of transmission stated that Umm 
Talha said, "By Allah, no one can reject the like of you, Abu Talha. But 
you are an atheist and I am a Muslim. I am not allowed to marry you. 
My dowry is to embrace Islam nothing else."[Reported by an-Nasa'i[ 


Abu Talha was impressed by her words and loved her more and 
more. As soon as he uttered the testification of faith, she got married 


625 


him. What a precious and an invaluable dowry Umm Salim got! She 
was the only woman to get such an honorable dowry. 

Having embraced Islam and approached its spirit, Abu Talha 
changed his mind completely and his soul was touched. He admired all 
the Islamic tenets and behavior. He was apprenticed like all companions 
at the hands of the Prophet (pbuh) 

Abu Talah was a wealthy man. He had a well, which he valued it 
greatly. When Allah the Almighty revealed a verse that stated. 


& al Ob od las Woke Gas Se NGS 
: Gy) Ate 
[sy Ohpes JH ® ce 


«By no means shall ye attain righteousness unless 
ye give (freely) of that which ye love: and whatever 
ye give, Allah knows it well.) 
(Al- Umran: 92) 

Abu Talha said to the Prophet (pbuh), "Allah the Almighty said « 


(By no means shall ye attain righteousness unless 

ye give (freely of that which ye love) 

What I love most is Bayraha (a well of his own). Therefore, I give 
it in charity for the sake of Allah. I want Allah's reward by spending it. 
Thus, you may place it wherever you want, Messenger of Allah. 


The Prophet (pbuh) commented. 


"Oh Noh! That is great that is a blessed property 
(He repeated it twice). I heard what you had said 
about it. I think it is better to consecrate it for your 
kin." Then, Abu Talha distributed it among his 
Muslim kin." 

(Reported by al-Bukhari) 
Allah blessed them by a son. They called him Abu Umair. The 


child brought them joy and happiness. It was Allah's willing to test 
them by taking the life of their child. The father did not know about the 


626 


death of his son. Umm Talha, peacefully, covered the child saying. "To 
Allah we are destined to return." She asked her family not to tell Abu 


Talha what happened to the child. 


When Abu Talha went home, he noticed that she was happy. He 
asked her about the child and she said. "He is very quite." Then she 
brought him dinner. After dinner she wore a fascinating dress adorned 
and perfumed herself. She was so charming that he made love with her. 


When she realized that he became satisfied and quite she asked 
him. What do you say if someone lend another something. Could he 
refrain of repaying it? He replied, "No" she said, "Our son was just a 
deposit from Allah and He restored him." Abu Talha got his nerve and 
said angrily. "You did not tell me before I became indulged in such 
impurity! But she kept admonishing him until he said. "To Allah we are 
destined to return". 


In the mornng he went to the Prophet (pbuh) complaining of 
his wife's conduct. The Prophet (pbuh) said. "May Allah bless your 
last night ". 


In that night she got pregnant. When she gave birth, she sent the child to 
the Prophet (pbuh) who chewed a date and then rubbed the child's 
mouth. The. Prophet (pbuh) called him ‘Abdullah. (Reported by 
Bukhari and Muslim) 


It was narrated that of the progeny of that child there were seven 
boys who finished memorizing the Glorious Qur'an 

There was also an astonishing story about Umm Salim. Once, a 
man came to the Prophet (pbuh) and told him that he was very poor. 
The Prophet in turn asked his wives whether they had something to 
entertain the guest. But they all replied that they had nothing. They said, 
"By whom He sent you with the Truth, we do not have anything but 
water." Then the Prophet (pbuh) openly said. "Who could receive him, 
may Allah have mercy on you?" One of the Helpers called Abu Talha 
said, "I could, Messenger of Allah." He went home accompanied by the 
man. He asked his wife, Umm Salim, “Do we have anything (to 
entertain the guest). She replied, nothing other than our kids' food" He 
said, "Let them sleep and pretend eating before the guest. When the 
guest starts eating, feign that your are repairing the lantern and then put 
it out." Accordingly, they spent the night hungry. 


627 


In the morning, he went to the Prophet (pbuh). The Prophet said to 
him, “Allah admired what you did with your guest last night. Thereupon 
Allah Exalted be He revealed « 


AE OMEN aay Et TRECs Ls we BOR 5 Nee Pigs, Gees nea ore 7 Bae 
ose YY pl Ae & ope Als or GANG SM 655 Gate 


va 


2 “7 A’ oe BE ne 7 9 eke os wats try 2 eg 5 
, oF a Je Osthy Ips La aol amsie G 
ie Bx ca aye sn ache ok 28 is ioe 
4) 5 suil SK 8 GS iy tei 

pa eh 


¢ And those who before them, had homes (in 

Madina) and had adopted the faith, show their 

affection to such as come to them for refuge, and 

entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to 

the (latter), but give them preference over themselves, 

even though poverty was their (own lot ). 3 

(Al-Hashr: 9) 

As for the role of Umm Salim in fighting in the cause of Allah, 
she, like many other Muslim women, took part in many battles of Islam. 
She had a great role in the battle of Hunayn where she encouraged the 
Muslim warriors, drank the thirst and treated the wounded. It was 
related that in the battle of Hunayn Umm Salim had a dagger. When 
Abu Talha complained to the Prophet by saying, "O Messenger of 
Allah, Umm Salim had a dagger." She said, "O Messenger of Allah, this 
is to defend myself and if an atheist approachs me I will tear his belly". 


The Prophet (pbuh) appreciated Umm Salim so much. He would 
only enter her home. The Prophet (pbuh) said « 


"Tl entered Paradise where I heard a rustle. I asked, 
"Who is that?" They replied "This is ar- Rumaisa' 
bint Malhan, the mother of Anas ibn Malik.” 

(Reported by Muslim and Bukhari) 


She really deserved such a rank for her sacrifice and her sincere 
faith (may Allah he pleased with her). 


628 


Umm Haram bint Malhan 


She was Umm Haram bint Malhan ibn Khalid ibn Zayd ibn 
Haram. She was amongst the Helpers of Madina She was the sister of 
Umm Salim, the aunt of Anas ibn Malik, and the wife of "Ubadah ibn 
as-Samit 

An-Nawawi narrated tn the explanation of Sahih Muslim that 
Umm Salim and Umm Hiram (may Allah be pleased with them both) 
were the Prophet's aunts from the maternal side either by suckling or by 
blood. She was the Prophet's aunt by either suckling or blood. Thus, the 
Prophet (pbuh) used to visit her. Anas ibn Malik (may Allah be pleased 
with him) reported, 

"Once, the Messenger of Allah, (pbuh) came to our 

home where there were only my mother, aunt Umm 

Haram and I. He said, let me lead you in prayer.” 

It was not a time of prayer by then." 

(Reported by Muslim) 

Umm Haram (may Allah be pleased with her) hoped for 
travelling in the cause of Allah by ship to disseminate Allah's word 
and raise higher the banner of Islam. Allah the Almighty fulfilled 
her hope as she accompanied her husband ‘Ubadah ibn as-Samit when 


conquering Cyprus. 
Anas (may Allah be pleased with him) reported « 


"When going to Qiba’, the Prephet (pbuh) used to 
visit Umm Haram, the wife of Abu “Ubada ibn as- 
Samit. One day the Prophet (pbuh) entered her 
home. She offered him food and when he finished 
eating she started to check his hair, then the 
Prophet (pbuh) slept. He awoke after a while 


629 


laughing. Umm Haram asked, "why do you laugh 
Messenger of Allah? He said. I saw some people of 
my nation on a board in the midst of the sea 
conquering in the cause of Allah. They were like 
kings on chairs.” Umm Haram said, "O Messenger 
of Allah may you invoke Allah to make me join 
them. The Prophet invoked Allah for her and slept 
again. He got up laughing Umm Haram said, O 
Messenger of Allah, "Why do you laugh?" He 
(pbuh) said, "I saw some people of my nation 
conquering in the cause of Allah. They were like 
kings on thrones" She said, "O Messenger of Allah, 
may you invoke Allah to make me join them" He 
said, you are among the earlier ones. 


Anas said, "Afterwards, she accompanied her 
husband, Ubadah ibn as-Samit when setting out for 
the conquest of Cyprus. Having left the sea, she 
rode on an animal, which killed her. She was 
buried in Cyprus The leader of this army was 
Mu‘awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan. This was in the era of 
‘Uthman (may Allah be pleased with them all). 

: [Reported by al-Bukhari] 


May Allah be pleased with the first naval martyr. 


630 


Umm Waraga 


She was the daughter of ‘Abdullah ibn al-Harith ibn Uwaimir 
ibn Nawfal. She was from the helpers. The Prophet (pbuh) called her 
the martyr. She hoped for death in the cause of Allah. Therefore, at 
the battle of Badr, she asked the Prophet's (pbuh) permission to join 
the Muslim army in order to treat the wounded or she might win the 
martyrdom. The Prophet (pbuh) said to her 


"Allah would grant you martyrdom. Stay home you 
are a martyr."1 


She (may Allah be pleased with her) memorized the Qur'an by 
heart. The Prophet (pbuh), therefore, allowed her to lead her 
household (of women) in prayer. 


She kept doing the rites of Islam until she was murdered at the 
hands of two slaves: male and female. These two slaves killed her 
because their freedom was conditional on her death. In the morning, 
“Umar ibn al-Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) said, "By 
Allah, I did not hear the recitation of aunt Umm Waraga last night. 
Accordingly he checked her home and found that she had died. He 
said, The Messenger of Allah was truthful when he used to say, 


"Let us go to visit the martyr”. 


“Umar ordered the killers to be brought before him. They 
confessed their crime. Thus, he sentenced them to be crucified. They 
were the first people to be crucified in Madina. May Allah have 
mercy on Umm Waraga who won the martyrdom, which she had 
asked before. [Related by Ibn Hajar in Isbah, Asbahani in He/yat al 
awliya' and al-Hakim in Mustadrak 


631 


Asma' Bint 'Amis 


She was Asma! bint 'Amis ibn Ma'd ibn Tamim ibn al-Harith 
ibn Ka'b ibn Malik ibn Quhafa. She was called Umm ‘Abdullah. She 
had embraced Islam before Muslims got into al-Argam house. She 
was the wife of Ja'far ibn Abu Talib, an honorable companion, whom 
the Prophet (pbuh) called the owner of two wings. When greeting 
‘Abdullah ibn Ja'far, the Prophet (pbuh) used to say, 


"Peace be upon you, son of the owner of two 
wings." [Reported by Al-Bukhari] 


Asma’ (may Allah be pleased with her) was among the early 
immigrants. She migrated with her husband, Ja'far ion Abu Talib to 
Abyssinia where she suffered a lot. There, she gave birth to three 
children: ‘Abdullah, Muhammad, and Awn. The first son was similar 
to his father and the father was similar to the Messenger of Allah 
(pbuh. ) 

When the Prophet (pbuh) issued a command for the immigrants 
to go to Madina Asma! was so pleased with the new Muslim State. 


She accompanied the caravan setting from 
Abyssinia to Madina in the second immigration. No 
sooner did the delegate arrive at Madina than it 
was proclaimed that Muslims had _ invaded 
Khaybar. When meeting Ja'far ibn Abu Talib, the 
Prophet (pbuh) said, "By Allah, I do not know 
which occasion does please me more: the victory in 
Khaybar or the arrival of Ja‘far". 
Once Asma’ bint Amais (may Allah be pleased with her) visited 
Hafsa bint ‘Umar. Having seen Asma’, ‘Umar asked, "Who is that?" 
she said "Asma, bint “Amais." ‘Umar replied, "The woman who 


632 


migrated to Abyssinian by sea." Asma'said, "Yes". Then “Umar 
said, "We migrated before you (to Madina). Therefore, we are closer 
to him than you." Asma’ became angry and said, "No, by Allah while 
you lived beside the Messenger (pbuh), eating and listening to his 
sermons, we lived far away in a foreign land in Abyssinsa. This was 
for the sake of Allah and his Messenger (pbuh). She added, "By 
Allah, I will never eat or drink until I mention that to the Messenger 
of Allah (pbuh). We were suffering and scaring. I will mention that 
typically to the Prophet (pbuh). When the Prophet (pbuh) came, 
Asma’ said, "Umar said, such and such." The Prophet (pbuh) said 
"What was your reply?" said, "I said such and such." The Prophet 
(pbuh) said, 


"He is not closer to me than you, the immigrants to 

Abyssinia). He migrated only once but you, the 

people of the ship, migrated twice." 

[Reported by Bukhari] 

Asma’ got pleased with the Prophet's response. The people soon 
knew what the Prophet (pbuh) said to Asma’. They began to come to 
Asma’ asking her about what they had heard. Asma' added, "I saw 
Abu Musa and the people of the ship coming one after the other to 
ask about this hadith, They were very joy and happy to hear that 
compliment from the Prophet (pbuh). 


In the day of Mu'tah, Jafar , Asma's wife was among the 
Muslim warriors who made great heroic attacks against the enemy. 
The Prophet (pbuh) appointed him as one of the three leaders in the 
battle of Mu'tah. Ja'far attained the honour of martyrdom in Mu'tah. 
He was called Jafar the pilot because his two arms were cut off 
while trying keeping the banner of Islam up. Instead of his two arms, 
Allah granted him two wings to fly in Paradise. 


When Ja'far died in the battlefield, the Prophet asked his 
household to make some food for Ja'far's family since they might be 
occupied by their affliction."(Reported by at-Tirmidhi) 

Asma’ had nothing to do but to keep patient and sought Allah's 
reward. Asma' devoted her life after the death of her husband to her 
children. But she was betrothed by Abu Bakr as-Siddiq soon after. 


633 


She suffered a lot during her life. The most heinous and severe 
affliction she had was the death of the Prophet (pbuh). Later on, her 
husband, Abu Bakr died. Abu Bakr left a will stating that her wife 
should wash him after death. Asma’ therefore washed her husband 
sadly. 

It is the Muslims manliness and chivalry that when one of them 
dies, they marry their brother's widow to one of them so as not to 
leave the widow or her children face the hardships of this life alone. 
Accordingly, Ali ibn Abu Talib betrothed Asma’ after the death of 
Fatima (may Allah be pleased with her). Asma‘ gave birth to Yahya 
and ‘Awn by Ali. 

Once, there happened a quarrel between two sons of Asma’, one 
belonged to Ja'far and the other to Abu Bakr. They boasted over each 
other by their fathers. Watching them quarrelling, Ali called upon 
their mother, Asma! to judge them. Asma’ said, "I have never seen on 
Arab young man better than Ja'far, so was the old man, Abu Bakr." 
The two kids embraced each other and went on playing again. But 
Ali said, "What about me, Asma"?" She smartly said, "If there is 
someone who is the least of three good people, they will all be elite" 
Ali said, "If you said other than that I would hate you". 


Ali ibn Abu Talib succeeded Uthman ibn Affan as the caliphate 
of the Muslims. Therefore, Asma’ got married to two caliphates of 
Muslims' Abu Bakr and Ali (may Allah be pleased with them all) 
after this long life of afflictions and trials during which Asma’ kept 
patient, Asma’ got ill and died (may Allah have mercy on her). 


634 


As shifa' bint al-Harith 


She was ash-Shifa’ bint “Abullah ibn “Abd Shams ibn Khalaf 
ibn Saddad ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Adiy ibn Ka‘b. She was from the 
tribe of Quraish. She embraced Islam before Hijrah and was 
among the early Muslim women who migrated from Makka to 
Madina and gave the pledge of faith to the Prophet (pbuh). 


She (may Allah be pleased with her) got married to Abu 
Khaythama ibn Hudhayfa and gave birth to a boy called Sulaiman. 
She learnt to read and write while still in Mekka before Islam. 
Having entered Islam, she (may Allah be pleased with her) 
shouldered the task of educating the Muslim women seeking 
Allah's reward. Thereby, she was called the first female teacher in 
Islam. Among the women apprenticed at the hands of ash-Shifa' 
was Hafsa bint ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, the Prophet's wife. 


It was reported that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) asked ash- 
Shifa' to teach Hafsa (may Allah be pleased with her) how to write 
and some healing and protective words. Ash-Shifa’ said, once the 
Prophet (pbuh) entered his home while I was there with Hafsa. He 
said « 


"May you teach that (Hafsa) the protective words 
concerning an-Namlah (a kind of sores affect one’s 
JSorehead) as you taught her how to write." 

[Reported by Abu Dawud] 


Ash-Shifa! was famous for such protective words in the pre- 
Islamic period but after she had embraced Islam and migrated to 
Madina, she said to the Prophet (pbuh), "I would like to show you 
the incantation | used to make before Islam." The Prophet (pbuh) 
said, "Let me see." Having shown him the incantation she used to 


635 


do, the Prophet (pbuh) said. "Use such words as protective and 
healing ones and let Hafsa learn them." The incantation she made 
was for treating an-Namlah (a disease. ) 

The Prophet looked after ash-Shifa' when she came to 
Madina and assigned her a house. She, like all other Muslim 
women, loved the Prophet (pbuh) and learnt much of his sayings. 
After such long life of striving, and sticking to Islam, she died 
twenty years after Hijrah (may Allah have mercy on her). 


636 


Umm Hakim Bint al-Harith 


She was Umm Hakim bint al-Harith ibn Hisham ibn al- 
Mughirah, Abu Jahl, ibn Hisham's niece. She was a sharp-witted and 
a wise woman. Al-Harith, Umm Hakim's father gave her to '‘Ikrima 
in marriage. Only after the great victory did al-Harith and his 
daughter, Umm Hakim enter Islam. But ‘Ikrima, whose blood was 
made lawful by the Prophet (pbuh) ran away. 


Having tasted the joys of the new faith Umm Hakim wished her 
husband embrace Islam. She went to the Prophet (pbuh) asking him 
to forgive her husband 'Ikrima if he entered Islam. Thereby, the 
Prophet (pbuh) forgave him. No sooner did she hear the Prophet's 
decree than she went forward to look for her fleeing husband so that 
she might find him before sailing. After a long search, she managed 
to catch him before sailing. She told him that the Prophet (pbuh) had 
forgiven him. 


She then began to speak to him about the tenets of Islam and 
how elevated are its goals. She also spoke about the honorable 
character of the Prophet (pbuh) when he entered Makka and how he 
forgave all people there, although they had conspired against them 
before. 


All what Umm Hakim said touched her husband's heart. 
Accordingly, he returned with her to embrace Islam before the hands 
of the Prophet (pbuh). He kept adhering to Islam and fighting in the 
cause of Allah until he attained the honor of martyrdom. Umm 
Hakim kept patient, although she was afflicted by the death of her 
husband, her brother and her father in the battlefield. 


Shortly after the death of her husband, she was betrothed to 
Khalid ibn Sa'tid, a Muslim leader. There occurred a war in which 
Khalid must lead the Muslim troops. Khalid wanted to consummate 
his marriage with Umm Hakim before wading into war. But Umm 
Hakim refused and asked him to delay that after war. He said, "I feel 


637 


that I will be killed there." Therefore, she agreed. As soon as he 
consummated his marriage with her and held the wedding banquet in 
the morning the Roman troops attacked them. The groom soon 
rushed into the battlefield and fought until he died as a martyr. It was 
said that Umm Hakim, after knowing that her husband had died, 
waded also into war to fight against the enemy. May Allah have 
mercy on her. 


638 


Umm Ayman 


She was Baraka bint Tha'laba ibn Amr ibn an-Nu'man. She was 
from Abyssinia. The Prophet (pbuh) inherited her from his father. He 
(pbuh) spent most of his childhood in her custody. But when he got 
married to Khadija bint Khuwailid (may Allah be pleased with her) 
freed her to marry Ubaid ibn al-Harith al-Khazraji by whom she gave 
birth to Ayman. 


The Prophet (pbuh) used to visit and honor her. He also used to 
call upon her by saying, "O mum" He would also say . 


"This is the remainder of my household and Umm Ayman is 
my mother after my mother passed away" 
[Reported by al-Hakim] 


She (may Allah be pleased with her) got married to Zayd ibn 
Harith, (may Allah be pleased with them both) by whom she gave birth 
to Usama ibn Zayd, the Prophet's beloved person. When the Prophet 
(pbuh) decreed mass immigration to Madina, she responded to the 
Prophet's call and migrated on foot. 


The Prophet (pbuh) used to treat her kindly. He would cuddle and 
make fun with her. Once, she came to the Prophet (pbuh) and said, "O 
Messenger of Allah, may you carry me." The Prophet (pbuh) said, I 
would carry you on the back of a she-camel's kid." She replied, "O 
Messenger of Allah, it could not." As a matter of fact all camels are 
she-camels' kids. 


In the battle of Uhud, she (may Allah be pleased with her) was 
among the Muslim women who were to carry water to soldiers and treat 
the wounded. She also did so in the battle of Khaybar. 


When the Prophet (pbuh) died, Abu Bakr (may Allah be pleased 
with him) said to ‘Umar, "Let us visit Umm Ayman as the Prophet 
(pbuh) used to." When seeing them, she wept. They asked her, "Why do 
you weep? What Allah prepared for His Messenger is better." She 
replied, I know, but I weep because the heavenly revelation will no 
longer come. Impressed by her words, they began to weep as 
well."(Reported by Muslim) 


639 


Hind Bint Utbah 


She was Hind bint ‘Utbah ibn Rabie’a ibn “Abd Shams ibn 
‘Abd Manaf. She was of good and rational character. Her son, 
Mu'awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan said about her, "She was greatly 
dangerous in the pre-Islamic period but was of good character in 
Islam". 


She got married to Al-Fakiha ibn al-Mughira by whom she gave 
birth to Abban. She after separating from al-Fakiha, got married to 
Abu Sufyan ibn Harb. 


In the battle of Badr, she was afflicted by the death of her 
father, ‘'Utbah, her brother, al-Walid and her uncle, Shayba. She 
grievously Jamented them and wished for taking vengeance. 
Therefore, in the battle of Uhud, she accompanied the army of 
Quraish like many other women who were to encourage the warriors. 
The women in this battle were to hit drums and sing poems in order 
to encourage the army. 


In this battle Hind committed a heinous crime which the history 
did not forget. She enticed her slave, Wahshi to assassinate Hamza 
who killed most of her family in the battle of Badr. Moreover, she 
after the death of Hamzah disfigured him and removed his liver to 
chew it. She could not swallow his liver, therefore she spat it out. 
Because of her hostile attitude towards Hamza in that day, she 
was called the ‘livers’ eater’. 


Not until the Manifest Conquest of Muslims in Makka did Hind 
come to the moment of illumination. It was said that when Abu 
Sufyan embraced Islam and went back to Makka crying, "O people 
of Quraish, Muhammed launched towards you troops that you could 
not oppose. Whoever entered Abu Sufyan's house is at peace, and 
whoever stayed home or entered the Sacred Mosque is at peace too." 


640 


Hind did not like her husband's behavior and insulted him. In 
the second day of the conquest she asked her husband to lead her to 
the Prophet (pbuh) He said, "Oh, you did not like that yesterday" she 
said, "I have never seen good worshipping of Allah like what the 
Muslims did last night. They spent all the night praying, kneeling 
and prostrating." Abu Sufyan said, "You would better go to him with 
one of your kin." Therefore, she went with Uthman ibn Affan (may 
Allah be pleased with him.) 


She stood veiled before the Prophet (pbuh) with some other 
women. She said, "O Messenger of Allah, praise be to Allah Who 
made the belief He chose manifest. I declare that I believe in Allah 
and His Messenger. Then, she disclosed her face and said, "I am 
Hind bint Utbah." The Prophet (pbuh) said, "Welcome" and began to 
take the pledge of fealty and faith from them. Hind said, "May we 
shake your hand?" The Prophet (puh) said. 


"T do not shake women's hands. What I Say to a woman is 
valid to a hundred." 
[Reported by Malik in Mouatta’] 


She then joined the Muslim community and took part in the 
Islamic achievements. She accompanied her husband in the battle of 
Yarmuk and reported some prophetic hadiths. She (may Allah be 
pleased with her) died fourteen years after Hijrah. May Allah have 
mercy on her. 


641 


Umm Sharik 


She was Ghaziyya bint Jabir ibn Hakim she was from Quraish. 
She embraced Islam while still in Makka. From the very beginning 
she started to disseminate Islam secretly among the women of 
Quraish. She did not bother about the torture she might face if the 
people know about her. 


When the people of Makka knew about her they said "We did 
not put you into torture for the sake of your kin. But all what we 
could do is to return you to them." When her kin received her they 
swore that they would put her into severe torture. 


They carried me on the worst of their camels and left me 
without water. In the midst of the day, when the sun became hot, 
they left me alone without shelter. I was about to lose my senses. 
Then they kept torturing me for three days. 


In the third day they offered to release me in condition that I 
repudiate. But I did not bother about them. All what I did was to 
point with my finger skyward. All of sudden, I found a goblet of 
water near my lip. After I had drunk, the goblet flew back and was 
hanged in the sky. This happened to me thrice. When they noticed 
my wet face, they wondered and asked me "O opponent of Allah, 
how could you get this water?" "It is Allah's sustenance," I replied. 
They went forward to check their water. They found it as it is. They, 
accordingly, said, "We testify that your Lord and ours is one." They 
all embraced Islam and migrated to Madina. May Allah have mercy 
on Umm Sharik who set a good example in the field of disseminating 
Allah's word. | 


642 


Umm al-Fadl 


She was Lubaba bint al-Harith ibn Hazan ibn Bujair, the wife of 
al-'Abbas. She gave birth to six boys by al-'Abbas, the Prophet's 
uncle. The names of her sons are al-Fadl, ‘Abdullah, ‘Ubaidullah, 
M'bad, Quthum and *Abdur-Rahman. 


She embraced Islam before Hijra. She was the second woman to 
enter Islam after Khadija (may Allah be pleased with them both). 


She was the brave woman who caused the death of Abu Lahab. 
Abu Rafi’ narrated that when Islam came I was still a servant to al- 
‘Abbas who embraced Islam secretly so did his wife, Umm al-Fadl. 
In the battle of Badr the men of Quraish went out to fight against 
Mulsims. Those who could not go charged another to fight instead. 
Among those who sent another one instead of them is Abu Lahab 
who sent al-'As ibn Hisham. 


Having known about the defeat of the people of Quraish in 
Badr, Abu Lahab got depressed and frustrated. On the other hand, we 
Muslims became proud and strong. Abu Rafi’ added, "I was a weak 
man carving cups near the well of Zamzam. While I was sitting there 
with Umm al-Fadl pleased with the victory of Islam. Then came Abu 
Lahab enraged with anger. Later on, Abu Sufyan came. Abu Lahab 
said to him, "May you tell us what happened in Badr?" Abu Sufyan 
said, "We did nothing but to give them (the Muslims) our backs to 
kill or to capture us whenever they like. By god, I did not blame our 
troops because the people we met are different. They were white and 
riding on white horses. By god, they could not be opposed." 
Thereupon, Abu Rafi’, raised the curtain of the room and said, 
"Those must be angels." Accordingly Abu Lahab punched him. They 
fought each other until Abu Lahab fixed him to the earth. Eventually 
Umm al-fadl held a cudgel and hit Abu Lahab on head saying "You 
consider him weak in the absence of his master" Thereby, Abu 
Lahab turned away humiliated. Seven days later he was afflicted by a 
fatal disease called al-'Adasa that killed him. 


643 


Once she had a dream. She saw one of the Prophet's organs in 
her home. The Prophet (pbuh) said, "It is good. Fatima will give 
birth to a child and you will suckle him with your son, Quthum." 


When Fatima gave birth to al-Hussain ibn Ali (may Allah be 
pleased with them both), Umm al-Fadl nursed him. Once, she carried 
him to the Prophet (pbuh). The Prophet (pbuh) started to cuddle and 
kiss him until the boy urinated over him. Then, he said, "Umm al- 
Fadl, hold my son, he urinated over me." He, then, sprayed water 
over the wet place. He said, 


"Wash the affected place if it is urination of a female 

baby and spray it with water if a male's." 

She (may Allah be pleased with her) reported thirty Prophetic 
hadiths. She died during the era of Uthman ibn Affan (may Allah 
have mercy on her). 


644 


Ar-Rubar Bint Mu‘awidh 


She was Ar-Rubai’ bint Mua‘widh ibn al-Harith ibn Rifa‘a ibn 
Malik, one of the early Muslim women. She was from the Helpers, 
who gave the pledge of faith to the Prophet (pbuh) under the tree. 
This pledge was mentioned in the glorious Qur'an, 


YES ah CEB Vol be ae Caps a iy BH Gap 
t 7% voy By Lee ‘> cb ae Zarn % ated qr ree iy ge oe 
Gok G6 ape Gh Ob Vy ad Sha ah YS BS 


4 


GP Gs OO ee. shee Bae Bel gig HAAN gS Po eR LR ér 
aul of ail Gh Jatt, Gea Ga G Shee Vy Suit 

i VN s Z 
[VY sdeecdl] é@) > Spe 


€O Prophet when believing women come to thee to 
take the oath of fealty to thee, that they will not 
associate in worship any other thing whatever with 
Allah, that they will not steal, that they will not 
commit adultery (or fornication), that they will not 
kill their children, that they will not utter slander, 
intentionally forging falsehood, and that they will 
not disobey thee in any just matter, then do thou 
receive their fealty, and pray to Allah for the 
forgiveness (of their sins): for Allah is Oft- 
Forgiving Most Merciful. 3 
(Al-Mumtahana: 12) 


She was an honorable and knowledgeable woman. The 
companions would ask her in the matter of the belief. She reported 


645 


the hadith concerning the manner of the Prophet's ablution. Abu 
Dawud reported on the authority of ar-Rubai’ that she said. 


"The Prophet used to visit us. Once he asked some 

water to do ablution. She then described the 
Prophet's way of doing ablution saying, "He 
started by washing his hand thrice..." 


She also said, 

"In the my wedding banquet, the Prophet (pbuh) 

came and sat upon my bed. Then, the girls began to 

sing and lament their fathers who died in the battle 

of Badr. One of the girls said, "And we have a 

Prophet who knows what will occur tomorrow" The 

Prophet (pbuh) said, "Do not say that you would 

better sing what you have said before that." 

(Reported by al-Bukhari) 

As for her contribution in fighting in the cause of Allah, she 
(may Allah be pleased with her) was among the Muslim women who 
would carry water to the soldiers and treat the wounded. In critical 
situations she would fight against the enemy. 

She died during the era of Mu‘awiyah forty-five years after 
Hyjrah. 


646 


Al-Khansa' 


She was Tamadur bint ‘Amr ibn al-Harith ibn ash-Sharid she 
was a famous poet when her brother, Sakhr, died, she composed 
some poetic masterpieces that made her the greatest poet in the field 
of lamentation. 


Afterwards she came to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) with her 
tribe to embrace Islam. Having entered Islam, She led a different life 
of honor, patience and gratitude. Islam changed the course of her 
life. 


In addition to her great poems, she had great heroic attitudes. In 
the battle of al-Qadisiyya, she accompanied the army with her four 
children. Before rushing into war she commended them saying , "O 
sons, you optionally entered Islam so did you migrate. You are all 
my sons. I never betrayed your father nor did I stain your lineage or 
forged your ancestry. You know what Allah prepared for Muslims of 
great reward when fighting against atheists. You have to know that 
the immortal life is better than the perishable. Allah the Almighty 
said. 


COR LG Ot WAGE EA ee 8 GB OR ee ey Gad he 

pA ail Lal, Lbs Whles Wael Ie sll EER 
aS Ay? 

[Ves cules Ji] 

€O ye who believe! Persevere in patience and 


constancy; vie in such perseverence; strengthen 


each other; and fear God; that ye may prosper. 
(Al- Imran: 200) 


In the morning, you have to equip yourselves enough. Throw 
yourselves in the midst of the war and do not be scared so as you 
may gain the honor of martyrdom. 


647 


Enraged with courage and enthusiasm, Al-Khansa's sons waded 
into war until they all died in the battlefield. Being informed of their 
death, Al-Khansa' said, "Praise be to Allah who honored me with 
their martyrdom. I pray to Allah to let me accompany them in the 
Last Day." She (may Allah be pleased with her) did not lament them 
as she did before when her brother, Sakhr died. She kept patient and 
sought Allah's reward. 

She died in the era of 'Uthman ibn 'Affan (may Allah be pleased 
with him) twenty four years after Hijra. May Allah have mercy on 
her. 


648 


Khawla Bint Tha laba 


She was Khawla bint Tha laba ibn Asram ibn ‘Auf, the wife of 
Anas ibn as-Samit who fought in the battle of Badr, Uhud and all other 
battles in which the Prophet (pbuh) fought. 

Once she annoyed her husband, Anas. Accordingly he said to her, 
“You are to me as the back of my mother." This statement was held by 
pagan custom to imply a divorce and free the husband from any 
responsibility for conjugal duties. Such a custom was in any case 
degrading to a woman. It was particularly hard on Khwla, for she loved 
her husband and pleaded that she had little children. She had no 
resources to support them. 

She urged her plea to the Prophet (pbuh) and in prayer to Allah. 
But the Prophet (pbuh) said, "I have no ruling concerning that. I 
think you are divorced." Thereupon, she had nothing to do but to 
invoke and complain to Allah. Having argued with the Prophet 
concerning her case, she complained to Allah. This is the perfection 
of faith to complain only to Allah. 

No sooner did she finish her prayer than the Holy Spirit come to 
the Prophet (pbuh). After he had been recovered, he said, 


"QO Khawla, Allah has revealed some verses of the Quraish 
concerning you and your husband" Then he started to read, 


253 8G Af) SES eg ALS SI SS St A 
BEE Re. ine a Khe ie 

[) :Wsteh © ac 
fAllah has indeed heard (and accepted) the 
statement of the woman who pleads with thee 
concerning her husband and carries her complaint 
(in prayer) to Allah: and Allah (always) hears the 
arguments between both of you: for Allah hears 


and sees (all things) 
[Al-Muyadilah: 1] 


649 


Her just plea was accepted, and this iniquitous custom, based on 
false words was abolished. 


The expiation prescribed for this utterance is to free a slave to fast 
two consecutive months, or to feed sixty indigent persons. These 
expiatory acts are to be applied in the above order. Someone cannot 
move on to a next act unless he fails. 


This is the story of the woman who argued with the Prophet 
(pbuh). ‘Aisha (may Allah be pleased with her) said, "Praise be to Allah 
Who hears all sounds. The woman who pleaded with the Prophet (pbuh) 
came and spoke with him in one corner of my house. I did not hear her 
but Allah did and revealed, 


Kesey wae tee Uae CA (i Sam ee 

s a aa an i He 

cy Walsh] &@ teas eet aul S| LS Le 
Sey & £ 


€Allah has indeed heard (and accepted) the 

statement of the woman who pleads with thee 

concerning her husband and carries her complaint 

(in prayer) to Allah)... 

[Al-Mujadilah: 1] 

Once this woman blocked ‘Umar's way to advise him saying. 
"OQ ‘Umar, fear Allah in your people. You have to know that 
whoever fears the warning will find the remotest thing close. 
Whoever fears from death would not like to miss anything. Whoever 
believes in the Judgement will fear from torture. When one of 
‘Umar's companions asked her to stop by saying "It is too much, and 
this is the leader of the believers." “Umar said, "Let her say. Do you 
not know her? This is Khawla to whom Allah listened from above 
seven heavens. Then ‘Umar has to listen too. 


650 


Umm Ruman 


She was the daughter of 'Amir ibn 'Uwaimir ibn "Abd Shams 
ibn '‘Itab ibn Malik ibn Kinana. She was born in a region called as- 
Sara, in the Arab peninsula. She got married to a-Harith ibn Sakhira 
by whom she gave birth to at-Tufail. 


She migrated with her husband al-Harith to Makka. There, they 
allied to ‘Abdullah ibn Abu Quhafa (Abu Bakr as-Siddiq), one of the 
eminent figures in Quraish. This occurred before the advent of Islam. 


Shortly, Al-Harith died. Abu Bakr betrothed al-Harith's wife to 
protect her and to commemorate the memory of his friend. Umm 
Ruman accepted Abu Bakr as a husband by whom she gave birth to 
*‘Abder- Rahman and " Aisha, the mother of the believers. 


No sooner was Muhammad sent as a Messenger than Abu Bakr 
followed him. He was the first man to enter Islam. He went forward 
to his wife Umm Ruman and called her to embrace Islam. Therefore, 
she entered Islam too. He asked her not to declare her faith until 
Allah decreed that. In this manner, the Prophet could stay peacefully 
in Abu Bakr's home. He can visit him any time and anywhere 
without any restriction or cautiousness. Furthermore, she stood by 
her husband in the time of adversity when all Muslim suffered 
torture and persecution. 


When the Prophet (pbuh) betrothed ‘Aisha (may Allah be 
pleased with her) Umm Ruman got pleased with such an honorable 
lineage. In madina, the Prophet (pbuh) consummated his marriage 
with ‘Aisha. As years passed, ‘Aisha was accused falsely with 
adultery. Umm Ruman did not tell her daughter what the people 
circulated about her. She only asked Allah in humility to disclose the 
innocence of her daughter. However, when 'Aisha knew the rumor, 
she went home blaming her mother for not telling her. All what 
Umm Ruman said, "O daughter do not care about that. By Allah, the 


651 


more beloved and beautiful a wife to her husbond the more rumors 
the people circulate." 

Eventually, Allah revealed the innocence of ‘Aisha in 
the glorious Qur'an to be recited up to the Last Day. Allah the 
almighty says, 


‘eF a > se is sce y ae ae weyl pole i Be 
3 


ieee: 2h OS 5 wih Ao CRG SS al 


piv 

«Those who brought forward the lie are a body 

among yourselves: think it not to be an evil to you.9 
[An-Nur: 11] 

In this period, Umm Ruman got ill ‘Aisha kept on looking after 
her until she died (may Allah have mercy on her). The Prophet 
(pbuh) entered her grave and asked Allah to forgive her by saying, 
"© Allah, You know well what Umm Ruman suffered for the sake of 
you and your Messenger.” 


652 


Umm 'Imara 


She was Nasiba bint Kab ibn 'Amr ibn 'Auf ibn ‘Abdhul al- 
Ansariyya who belonged to Banu Mazin. She was among the first 
Madinian women to enter Islam. She accompanied the delegate who 
set out from Madina for Makka in order to give the pledge of faith to 
the Prophet (pbuh). The delegate consisted of seventy-two persons, 
two of them were women. 


She was a brave woman. In the battle of Uhud she joined the 
Muslim army with her two sons: ‘Abdullah and Habib. She was to 
carry water to the Muslim soldiers but when the Muslims were 
trapped, she had nothing to do but to hold a sword in order to defend 
the Prophet (pbuh). She received in this battle about thirteen wounds. 
She remained treating these wounds for a year although she came out 
bleeding from the battle of Uhud, she went with the Muslim army to 
fight in the battle of Hamra' al-Asad, which occurred immediately 
after the battle of Uhud. 


Let us give Umm ‘Imara our ears to recount such amazing 
story. She said, "I noticed in the battle of Uhud the people leaving 
the Prophet (pbuh) alone. There were only ten people around him. 
Subsequently I stood by him beside my two sons and my husband. 
Many people passed by the Prophet (pbuh) defeated. Meanwhile, the 
Prophet (pbuh) noticed me unarmed. When he noticed a man fleeing 
from the battlefield with his weapon, he ordered him saying "Throw 
your weapon to whomever can fight instead." Having thrown it, I 
picked it up and started to defend the Prophet (pbuh). But it is the 
horsemen who trapped us and put us into difficulty. Were they 
infantry like us we would defeat them by Allah's willing. Thereupon, 
a horseman attacked me. But I received his sword on my shield, and 
when he turned back I hit the rear of his horse with my sword. The 
man fel down joggling on his back. Then, the Prophet (pbuh) 


653 


shouted, "O son of Umm ‘Imarah, your mother, your mother!" Then 
came my son to help me and I killed him." 


As years passed, Umm ‘Imara kept on serving the call of Islam 
at war or peace. When the Prophet (pbuh) died, some Muslim tribes 
converted leaded by Musailama, the liar. No sooner did Abu Bakr, 
the caliphate of the Muslims, issue his command to the Muslims to 
fight the apostates than Umm 'Imara went forward to Abu Bakr to 
ask his permission to fight against the apostates. Abu Bakr (may 
Allah be pleased with him) said to her, "We know that you fight well 
you can go (may Allah bless you). 


She set out accompanied by her son, Habib to fight in the cause 
of Allah seeking the honor of martyrdom. But Musailama managed 
to capture her son, Habib as a prisoner of war. He tried to convert 
him but all his efforts and attempts went in vain. He started to cut off 
Habib's body into pieces but Habib kept patient and resorted to Allah 
and sought his pleasure. It was said that Habib's body was cut off 
into piles of detached organs. 


Yet, Umm “Imara set out to fight in the battle of Yamama 
accompanied by her other son, “Abdullah. In this battle, ‘Abdullah 
managed to kill Musailama aided by Wahshi ibn Harb. Thereupon, 
when she know about the death of this tyrant liar she prostrated to 
Allah. She (may Allah be pleased with her) came out from this battle 
having twelve wounds. Moreover, she lost her arm and her son, 
‘Abdullah as well. She was indeed an example of courage and 
sacrifices to all women any time and anywhere. 


654 


Umm Mihjan 


She was a black woman who lived in Madina. She was poor and 
weak. The Prophet (pbuh) as usual was so kind towards her. Although 
she was old and weak, she did not exampt herself from serving in the 
cause of Allah. 

She looked after the mosque of Allah She was to clean the 
mosque in which Muslims gather together in order to learn, consult 
each other or plan for war. Actually, all walks of the Muslim life should 
begin from the mosque. 

Therefore, Umm Mihjan did not belittle to serve as a dust woman 
in the mosque to make it convenient as a constant meeting place for 
Muslims. She kept on doing that until she died at the lifetime of the 
Prophet (pbuh). 

One moming, the Prophet (pbuh) missed her. He asked his 
companions about her. They said, "She died and was buried." Then, the 
Prophet asked them to lead him to her grave. There he stood to pray the 
funeral prayer. This story is mentioned by al-Bukhari on the authority 
of Abu Huairah. Abu hurairah reported, 

"There was a woman (or a man) who were 

sweeping the mosque. Once, the Prophet (pbuh) 

missed her. He asked the people about her. They 
said, "she died." He wondered why they did not tell 

him of her death" Abu Hurairah said, They might 

have belittled her" The Prophet (pbuh) said, "May 

you lead me to her grave?" There, he performed 

the funeral prayer and said. "These graves are full 

of darkness and engulf its dwellers but Allah 

enlightens it by the virtue of my prayers." 

(Reported by al-bukhari and Muslim) 
May Allah have mercy on Umm Mihyan, a poor but great woman whom 
the Prophet (pbuh) prayed over her tomb. 


5 Lu} gle 


coe iy aaj gilly Aa 
WOVWA : 2. — By gail — 20 
ATP OE: Sgnme — eT eOe/V oP eVok 2 


Dar Al-Manarah 
For Translation, Publishing & Distribution 
El-Mansoura — Egypt - Tel Fax: 002050/2030254 
Hand phone: 012/3605049 - P.O.BOX: 35738 
E. mail: almanarah400@hotmail.com 


Dar Al Kotob Library Number : 2002 / 19100 


1.S.B.N.977 — 6005 - 21-7 


